Question :my 9 year old would like to know what is the coolest thing about your discovery? and what should he study at school to get to do your job in future? and what happens to the waves after they go out into space?

EDIT: I cant spell

Answer :The coolest thing is now we have a new way of finding out about awesome things in space - mostly really huge stars that we don't know very much about yet.

He should study maths, physics and computing in school. We have teams of physicists, engineers and computing scientists that work for us. I'm a physicist.

The waves are released really far away in space and travel towards us for over a billion years before our detectors 'see' them.

Edit: JW, grad student, experimental interferometry

Question :What counts as a black hole merging? When the singularities combine or when the event horizons touch each other?

Answer :Generally it is the latter, the touching of event horizons. However we could also see the ringing of final black hole which could provide some information about what happens after the touching of event horizons. The physics of it is still in early stages. 

SK, postdoc, data analyst/instrumentalist 

Question :As a retired physicist who has worked with interferometers I am blown away with your accuracy,  It seems to be orders of magnitude more than I am familiar with.  I looked at your paper, http://arxiv.org/pdf/1604.00439v1.pdf, but still do not get where the improvement comes from. Is it some breakthrough, or just doing what was done before but much more precisely?

Answer :Basically, by using several clever tricks. :)  The Fabry-Perot optical cavities in the arms, which keep most of the light bouncing back and forth in the cavity, boost our sensitivity by about two order of magnitude compared to having simple arms bouncing the beams back to the beam splitter.  Power recycling recaptures light that would otherwise exit the interferometer, helping us build up lots of laser power -- and having so many photons keeps the quantum noise relatively low.  Signal recycling is a little subtle, but helps us achieve good sensitivity over the frequency band we want.  We stabilize the laser in a few ways, and keep mechanical and electronic noise sources down through careful design and engineering.  So yes, there are some fancy techniques in there, but mostly it is just putting it all together very carefully.

PS, professor, data analysis and astrophysics (mostly)

Question :What do you think the biggest misconception is that the average person has about your industry?

Answer :Perhaps, the biggest misconception is that we are all similar, boring physicists. This detection required the expertise and skills of people from all levels of education, from all over the world – most of which are truly passionate about opening this new window to the universe. 

JR, engineer, instrumentalist 

Question :How does it feel knowing that you're basically listening to the universe's dubstep mixtape?

Answer :Whether it is dubstep or not, it feels great!

KAS, professor, instrumentation.

Question :Seeing as they're called gravitational "waves," do they possess some of the wavelike properties we've learned about in high school? For example, light and sound waves can be refracted, reflected, diffracted, polarized, and so on. Do gravitational waves have these traits, and if so could you explain them a little? 

Answer :Yes, gravitational waves can have all of the same types of interactions as other waves, as long as you are considering the correct limit.  For instance, light waves occur at much higher frequencies than are typical for gravitational waves.  We are used to dealing with light in the so-called "geometric optics" limit, where the object doing the refracting (i.e. a lens) is much larger than the wavelength of the light.  Since gravitational waves can have much longer wavelengths, they will only behave in a totally analogous way to light if the object doing the lensing is correspondingly larger.  Otherwise, the interaction won't be in the right limit, so the wave will behave differently, but the same would be true if light interacted with a lens comparable to or smaller than its wavelength, for example. 

STM, Professor, source modeling and astrophysics

Question :Why do you think the black holes collided?

Answer :Black holes are very massive objects. This means they exert a very strong pull on other objects due to gravity. This pull or force causes them to orbit each other. As they do they lose energy as gravitational waves and the orbits get smaller and smaller until they collide.

JW, grad student, experimental interferometry

Question :Given the 2 events observed (or 3, including LVT151012), and given the expected increase in sensitivity over the coming year, how many events can be expect in O2?

Answer :From these events, we expect to see ~50 events per year.  There still significant uncertainties in these  numbers (10 events per year is very likely). The table II in our paper [link](http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.04856) provides better numbers with uncertainties.

SK, Postdoc, data analyst/instrumentalist  

Question :It seems like Weiss, Drever, and Thorne have won every major prize in astronomy this year. Is the collaboration hopefully for a Nobel in the near future?


Answer :The LIGO founders have certainly been receiving the recognition they deserve in response to the gravitational wave discoveries.  Hulse and Taylor won the Nobel Prize in 1993 in part for "demonstration of gravitational waves" by the orbital decay of a binary pulsar system in our galaxy, so there is precedent for this kind of science being recognized by the Nobel committee.   While the prize is not the motivation for LIGO's work, it would be a nice way to cap the incredibly successful first observing run.

TBL, Research Scientist, Data Analysis / Astrophysics

Question :What implications does this have in our search for dark energy?

Answer :The concept of Dark Energy is an attempt to explain why the expansion of the universe is *accelerating*.  Imagine the universe is painted on the surface of a balloon:  An expanding Universe would be a balloon that is inflating steadily.  An accelerating expansion would be a balloon that is inflating faster as it gets larger.  Our understanding of how the universe as a whole works comes from Einstein's General Theory of Relativity and Dark Energy is basically a modification to Einstein's original equations to account for the observed accelerated expansion.  But perhaps Einstein's equations are not perfect.  By measuring gravitational waves, we are able to test Einstein's theory in new ways.  So far our theoretical predictions from General Relativity have matched our gravitational wave observations, but we will continue to test them with ever-increasing sensitivity as we measure more and stronger gravitational wave signals.  Eventually we might uncover a scenario where General Relativity *does not* accurately explain our measurement, at which point we may gain new insights into some of the consequences of that theory, such as Dark Energy.

TBL, Research Scientist, Data Analysis / Astrophysics

Question :How does space-time behave across a gravitational wave, relative to normal space?

Answer :The gravitational waves that we have detected alternately stretch and compress distances measured in spacetime by a really tiny amount - less than 1 part in 10 to the power 21. So space is barely disturbed at all. That's why it has taken decades of effort and extreme technology to see the first signals.  

A feature of the waves is that when one direction is compressed, at 90 degrees to that space is stretched (and a half-cycle of the wave later the situation is reversed). That's why we use L shaped detectors. 

KAS, professor, instrumentalist.

Question :Which color or wavelength is the laser in the inferometers?

Answer :The wavelength currently used is 1064 nm. That's twice as long as the wavelength of green light. Comparing it to the rainbows you can see in the sky: 400 nm is violet and 650 nm is red.

Prior to 1995, most of the experiments used green lasers. Some of the ideas for future interferometers entail using a laser with a 1500-2200 nm wavelength due to material science issues.

RXA, experimental physicist

Question :Aside the background noise, what are the greatest sources of imprecision in your measures?

Answer :"Background noise" could mean a few different things.  If you mean noise from outside the detector -- like, vibrations and stray electric/magnetic fields -- then yes, those are a source of imprecision, especially at low frequencies.  We also have noise sources that are internal to the detectors.  The fundamental quantum noise of the laser beams used to measure the distances between mirrors, due to the fact that light is carried by discrete photons, is our main noise source at high frequencies, above ~100 Hz.  Thermal noise -- the random motion of the individual atoms making up parts of the detectors, like the mirror coatings and the fibers and springs that the mirrors are hanging from -- also contributes some at medium frequencies.  Finally, even if we understand all the sources of random noise, there's a limit to how well we know the calibration of our detectors; with a lot of careful work we can pin it down within several percent, but that's still an uncertainty we have to account for when analyzing our data.

PS, professor, data analysis and astrophysics

Question :What does the data analysis involve?

Question :How helpful is gravityspy.org #citizenscience, since finding #gravitationalwaves relies on cleaning out noise, like a needle in a haystack?

Answer :Since LIGO is so sensitive to minuscule changes in distance, it is also susceptible to many instrumental and environmental sources of noise. LIGO relies on having two detectors to look for coincident signals between the detectors - noise is unlikely to happen at both detectors at about the same time whereas gravitational waves should hit both the detectors at nearly the same time (since they go right through our planet). However, even with the two detector failsafe similar noise features can hit both the detectors at the same, and at times when there are strong noise triggers it makes that data essentially useless (if a GW hits the detector when noise hits the detector, would it make a sound? :)

This is especially detrimental in looking for unmodelled GW signals, since we do not have great models for how they are supposed to look to compare with the data, like we do with compact binary inspirals. Gravity Spy uses human intuition and machine learning to classify and characterize many of these sources of noise, which will help LIGO scientists identify what is causing the noise and remove it from the data or the instrument all together, and making it even more sensitive to gravitational waves.

MZ, doctoral student, Astrophysics / Detector Characterization

Question :How will these discoveries change the way we live today?

Answer :Up until LIGO came on line, almost everything we know about the Universe has come to us from light, either from just looking up at the night sky, to advanced space telescopes, and everything in between.  Now, through gravitational wave observations, we have a brand new way of receiving information from the Universe.  It's as if we have gained a new "sense" to explore our surroundings, and we are bound to learn things about how the Universe works that we couldn't have otherwise.  

TBL, Research Scientist, Data Analysis / Astrophysics

Question :Cheers! How do you think the transition from sight-based to sound-based astronomy will affect science (since we're so visually driven)? Saluti!

Answer :Observing and gathering information through multiple windows (Visible light, X-rays, Radio Waves, Neutrinos... and now Gravitational Waves) will allow astronomers to get a better and more vivid picture of the Cosmos ... So its rather a transition to the era of Multi-messenger Astronomy

NM, PhD student, Detector Characterization/Astrophysics

Question :Congratulations on another detection!  I have two questions: How much will the localization improve with the next generation instruments? Also do you expect to see a GW event where an electromagnetic (i.e. photons, light) counterpart is predicted soon?

Answer :Localization:  The majority of our localization information comes from the differences in arrival time between detectors.  Therefore, the best way to improve localization is to increase the number of observatories around the world.  During the next observing run we expect the European observatory, Virgo, to begin taking data.  In the early part of the next decade, detectors in India and Japan will join the world-wide network.  By then typical localizations will go from 100s of square degrees down to a few.  You can have a look at https://arxiv.org/abs/1304.0670 which is occasionally updated with new forecasts.

Electromagnetic:  We are all certainly looking forward to observing the same source with gravitational waves and photons.  We work closely with electromagnetic observing partners around the world to follow-up gravitational wave candidates with telescopes.  As the sensitivity of the detectors improves so too will the chance for joint observations, because we will increase the volume of space where we are sensitive.  .  We would be ecstatic for that to happen during the next observing run starting this Fall, where we will be probing a factor of ~2 larger volume, but there are no guarantees.  We'll have to be patient and let the Universe decide when we get the chance to begin the era of *multimessenger* astronomy.

TBL, Research Scientist, Data Analysis / Astrophysics

Question :So you didn't get a neutron star merger during the O1 run. This must be pushing the event rate *way* down. What does this mean for models that assume short GRBs are produced by neutron star mergers?

Is there friction between the event rate we could expect given the observed rate of sGRBs (assuming they are produced by NSMs) and the lack of events observed by LIGO during the O1 run?

Answer :Not yet - the range of rates allowed by population models is huge.  There is a way to go before we constrain these rates to any significant extent.  Remember how far away most GRBs are - we can't see neutron stars mergers anything like as far away as the black hole mergers.  KAS, professor, instrumentalist.

Question :What is your favorite pizza?

Answer :With over 1000 international members in our collaboration, there is, by definition, 1000s of favorites!
JR, engineer, instrumentalist

Question :What do we physically know about 'gravitational waves' in terms of how we translate that to sound since [sound](http://physics.info/sound/) can't travel through a vacuum (like, space), for example, are there similarities to electromagnetic waves? Best in your work!

Answer :If the gravitational waves happen to oscilate at a frequency such as, for example, low C we can play the signal through a loudspeaker and hear the familiar sound.  The detectors are in a sense like ultra-sensitive microphones, though it is not vibrating air molecules we are picking up, but vibrations in spacetime.   One similarity with EM waves is they travel at the same speed as gravitational waves.  I prefer to say that light travels at the speed of gravity, rather than gravity travels at the speed of light.
KAS, professor, instrumentalist.

Question :Do you wear lab coats?

Answer :While working in and around the vacuum chambers, in which are optics reside, we wear special scrubs and cleanroom garb (“bunny suits”) that cover us from head to toe. We need to do this to reduce the particulate and contamination that would make its way to the optics and cause absorption when we are pumped down to 10^-9 torr and lasing.

JR, engineer, instrumentalist

Question :I thought LIGO+VIRGO was supposed to be able to triangulate the position of gravitational wave sources. Why is the position estimate still so large?

Answer :The Virgo detector is not up and running quite yet so for these two detections we have only had two detectors with the correct sensitivity range to see these sources (Advanced LIGO Hanford and Advanced LIGO Livingston). Once Advanced Virgo has finished its installation and is also looking with the Advanced LIGO detectors this will improve the position estimate.

JW, grad student, experimental interferometry

Question :I've read that some scientists (not stated whether they are with LIGO or not) believe this recent sighting may have accidentally shown us some dark matter. Is there any truth to this statement?

Answer :Technically speaking, black holes are "dark matter" in that they account for part of the total mass of the Universe but do not emit any light.  That being said, the question is whether or not there are *enough* black holes to account for the total amount of dark matter we need to explain the observed Universe.  Smaller black holes, like the ones we observed in December, have already been ruled out as a significant contribution to dark matter.  The larger black holes, like we found in September, *could*, be a larger contributor but more observations from LIGO and other experiments will help support or rule out that possibility.

TBL, Research Scientist, Data Analysis / Astrophysics


Question :Why is it important the detection of gravitational waves?

Thanks a lot for taking your time here.

Answer :There are probably a range of opinions among the LIGO and Virgo scientists about this. I think its important because we have basically proven that we can build a new type of telescope that can look at the universe via signals that we have never been able to use to observe things before. This means we can find out information about objects that don't really emit enough energy in electromagnetic signals to be seen with conventional telescopes. For instance the detections we have made already tell us about black holes. These were objects that had never been directly observed before because they don't emit light (electromagnetic radiation). I mean, scientists believed they did exist because we could see their effect of other objects, but not the black holes themselves.
JW, grad student, experimental interferometry

Edit: 'see their effect on other objects'

Question :When a gravitational wave arrives at an angle to the plane of the interferometer other than perpendicular, don't they oscillate the test masses in directions other than that of the laser? Wouldn't the vertical component of its motion couple with its horizonal motion due to the way it's suspended?

Answer :The detectors can only sense in the plane of the "L" shape.  Even if the mirrors were to move perpendicular to the plane, that would not (to first order) change the length of the arm and that's what we measure. Actually vertical seismic noise can be a problem if it gets though our isolation systems to the mirrors, but that's because "vertical" is not exactly the same direction at the two ends of a 4km arm due to the curvature of the earth's surface, so there is a component of the motion in the plane of the detector.
KAS, professor, instrumentalist

Question :Why is a chirp signal associated with gravitational wave detection?

Answer :A gravitational wave detection does not need to be a chirp. Any gravitational wave signal will cause the LIGO detectors (and eventually Virgo and others around the world) to respond together in a predictable way.  We search for gravitational waves in the data by looking for a "pattern" in the data that is found in multiple detectors.  The chirp signal is the *tell tale* sign that the gravitational wave came from the merger of two dense objects and not something else (like a supernova, spinning neutron star, etc.).  How long the chirp lasts, and at what frequency (or pitch) the chirp ends, tells us about the masses of the two objects that merged.  Because our two discoveries were both relatively short and low frequency, we are able to confirm that they came from the mergers of black holes.  Longer-lasting signals, and higher frequency chirps, would imply that the objects were lower in mass. A very long, very high frequency chirp would be caused by merging neutron stars instead of black holes, which would be another moment of great excitement for gravitational wave astronomers and astrophysicists.  

TBL, Research Scientist, Data Analysis / Astrophysics

Question :Congratulations on the second detection! How do we proceed from here? What's next for LIGO after this second detection of gravitational waves? Thanks! You guys are awesome.

Answer :Lots of hard work is already underway to make the detectors even better, ready for 6 months observing starting this Fall. Then more upgrading and data taking until we reach full design sensitivity - around 3x better than in O1, seeing 3x farther out, which means we should see about 27 times the rate of events in that volume.   Add Virgo, Kagra and LIGO India detectors and we'll have an amazing observatory, black holes seen every week or so, and hopefully many other signals too.
KAS, professor, instrumentalist.

Question :If CERN were to discover the currently theoretical graviton particle tomorrow, what would that mean for LIGO's research?

Answer :That would be awesome!

We can actually think of gravity in terms of fields, in which case a gravitational wave is a disturbance travelling in a gravitational wave field that interacts with the light waves in our detector. This is the 'wave' picture.

Alternatively we can think of it in terms of particles interacting with each other in which case a gravitational wave is actually gravitons interacting with the laser photons in the detector. This is the 'particle' picture.

We usually use the 'wave' way of thinking about gravitational waves as we don't know enough about gravitons and how they interact to use the 'particle' explanation.

If CERN discovered these then it would give us a whole new way of doing some of our theory calculations and this might give us new insight into how gravity itself works.

Because of the discovery of the photon, we understand how light works a lot more, it would be great if this happened with the graviton.

JW, grad student, experimental interferometry

Question :Do you have the capability to detect a unique polarization pattern that would result from the colliding of bubble galaxies?


EDIT: meant to say *bubble universes*

Answer :The gravitational waves from colliding galaxies will be of very low frequency and sensitivity of LIGO detectors are not good at low frequency to see them. However LIGO can in principle to see different polarizations than predicted by GR if the frequencies of signals are in the sensitive band. But that would require different signal processing than we are currently doing to look for binary coalescence signals.

SK, postdoc, data analyst/instrumentalist.
 

Question :Gravitational waves are said to be the only potential way to communicate with another universe (if another universe exists).

How much energy would be required for humans to engineer a wave of the magnitude you observed from the merging black holes?

Answer :The gravitational waves we have detected so far came pairs of black holes that orbit one another.  As they orbit they lose energy in the form of gravitational waves until they eventually merge.  The amount of energy lost to gravitational radiation depends on the original masses of the black holes.  For the September detection, GW150914, the system radiated about 3 solar masses worth of energy.  That is, take 3 times the mass of the sun, and convert that into pure energy using Einstein's handy E=mc^2 equation.  Give it a shot, but you might break your calculator.   For comparison, turning a single mosquito into pure energy would be enough to power an average home for a year.  The December event, GW151226, was lower in mass, emitting about 1 solar mass worth of energy.

So, for humans to generate this sort of signal, we would have to annihilate the entire solar system.  I wouldn't recommend that experiment...

TBL, Research Scientist, Data Analysis / Astrophysics


Question :Hi! If ever you add up another batch of instruments that could detect gravitational waves, plus further increase the sensitivity of LIGO and others, how do you foresee the likelihood of discovering gravitational waves? Would it be very frequent? And also, could LIGO detect other potential sources of gravitational waves such as neutron star collisions or neutron star-black hole binaries, or is LIGO not yet sensitive for that? 

Answer :The more gravitational wave detectors we have the better! Over the next few years, more ground-based facilities will be joining LIGO in searching for gravitational waves - such as Virgo in Italy, LIGO India, and Kagra in Japan. In the future, we'll also send gravitational wave observatories into space (such as eLISA), which will be able to look at gravitational waves at different frequencies than ground-based detectors and see different types of objects and events. 

One of the greatest benefits of having more detectors in the network is localizing gravitational wave events better (constrain what part of the sky they came from). Check out this image to see how well we're able to localize the events as of now: http://ligo.org/detections/images/gw150914-lvt151012-gw151226.jpg

As LIGO advances and upgrades, it becomes more sensitive to gravitational waves, which means it is able to explore a larger volume of the Universe. By doing so, the rate at which we see gravitational wave events should increase!

LIGO can certainly detect things other than black hole-black hole mergers. The mergers of two neutron stars or a neutron star-black hole binary are expected to be detected, though since they are lower mass systems we can't see them quite as far away in the Universe than black hole-black hole mergers. So LIGO is sensitive enough to detect those systems, we just need to catch ones that are slightly closer to us. It will be very exciting when we find a system containing a neutron star, because they're expected to emit light as well as gravitational waves. 

MZ, doctoral student, astrophysics / detector characterization

Question :Does gravitational wave astrophysics purely incorporate Einstein's relativity? Or does it have any implications in quantum mechanics or physics beyond the standard model? If so, how and why?

Answer :At this point we're delighted to have been able to check the GW150914 wave against GR. It is a strong signal and the fit is good*.  It will probably be a while until we get a better black-hole signal to probe any deeper.  When we start to detect gravitational waves from neutron stars either as pulsars, or when they are being ripped apart in a merger with another neutron star or a black hole, we might start to get some clues about their structure which depends on the strong force. That's an interesting regime to probe.
KAS, professor, instrumentalist.

*We wrote a paper on that Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 221101 (2016)

Question :Are the recently detected gravitational waves already in the limits of sensitivity of LIGO's detectors, or can the detectors still detect far fainter signals? If so, what are the limits of sensitivity? How do you upgrade LIGO?

Answer :Fortunately, yes, both GW events were within LIGO's sensitivity limits! Although, because the detectors aren't perfect we are indeed limited by certain types of noise sources. For example, at low frequencies, we're usually limited by seismic noise from things like earthquakes! We're limited by many other different types of noise sources as well, but as we improve the detector we'll hopefully continue to see these limits decrease and possibly detect even fainter signals. 

HG, Research Assistant, Detector Characterization

Question :About how many times have you asked yourselves, "Have we really detected this, guys?"? Hahaha Any possible plans for collaboration with CERN? Could the black holes merging or the resulting black hole formed have an accretion disk for EM based astronomers to observe them?

Answer :I think when we made the first detection and while the analysis was being carried out, most of the collaboration was asking themselves that question. We were sure once we released the first detection paper, as sure as scientists ever are when they publish. There is always the chance that other scientists could look at your research and find something wrong with your maths or your method, or even that they could carry out another experiment and disprove your research.

For the second detection I think we were all a bit more confident as we were further is the analysis for the first detection at this point and the detectors has been observing for a longer period.

We don't plan to collaborate with CERN at the moment. Mainly because we are a telescope so we look for events that are already occurring in the universe, we don't create events to observe.

CERN is an experiment where they create events in their accelerator and then look at the results. So we are different types of experiments.

There might be a possibility that we work together on theory in the future if CERN discovered something about gravity.

Indeed the whole community of scientists around the world in every field of research is meant to work together. Thats why we have conferences and scientific journals, to discuss each others' work.

There is a possibility that there would be an accretion disk around one of the black holes that is merging but this is unlikely to still be there around the final black hole due to the high forces involved in the merger possibly ripping it apart.

We do send out detection alerts to EM astronomers at space-based and ground-based telescopes every time we see something that has a good chance of being a real signal.

JW, grad student, experimental interferometry

Question :If the black hole merger happened, say, only about 1000 light years away, how "large" of a distortion would be the effect of gravitational waves on us and Earth?

Answer :The effect of GWs on our detectors is proportional to their amplitude which means the signal rises in proportion as the distance falls.  (It is not like detecting photons, which is a measurement of the signal power, when we get the familiar 1/r^2 law.)  The first events are - in rough terms - 1 billion ly distant, you ask about 1 millionth of that distance, so the peak strain would be 1 million times what we saw at around 1 part in 10 to the power 15.   That's huge for us, but still tiny - just picometres of movement of the detector's mirrors. Your height and mine would oscillate by a couple of proton diameters as the wave passed through.  Nothing to worry about.

The chance of that happening is around 1 per hundred million billion years,  so I don't plan to hold my breath.
  
KAS, professor, instrumentalist.

Question :Dark matter is considered to be the "pulling force" which has the universe accelerating.. How do we know that it is not just a super massive black hole we are heading towards? 

Answer :The acceleration of the universe is due to what we call dark energy, as opposed to dark matter.  Dark energy might just be a manifestation of a particular allowed solution of Einstein's theory, or it could be due to some new physics, we don't really know at this point.  Dark matter, on the other hand, is related to the fact that if the only matter in the universe was made up of things that we see/that emit light, then it turns out that galaxies could never have formed the way they have, and they wouldn't rotate in quite the same way that we observe them to.  We need an extra amount of matter to cause galaxies to clump together in the early universe, and to be spread amongst the regular matter in galaxies, so that it changes the orbits of the regular matter (e.g. stars) that we do directly observe.  If the dark matter was made up of supermassive black hole, then we would be able to observe them in the cosmic microwave background (CMB).  Dark matter needs to be primordial, meaning created in the very early universe, in order to explain the subsequent formation of galaxies, but if it was made up of supermassive black holes, then those black holes would accrete the surrounding matter and emit highly energetic radiation.  This would change the appearance of the CMB in a predictable way, but in a way that we don't actually observe, so we know that dark matter can't be made up of supermassive black holes.

STM, Professor, source modeling and astrophysics

Question :Is there any other event that could theoretically produce more gravitational waves than 2 black holes merging? If not what else could come close, if anything?

Answer :The strength of the gravitational waves emitted is proportional to the masses involved and the speed at which they move. Since black holes are generally massive objects in the universe and also move relatively fast they expected to produce strong gravitational waves and hence considered one of the efficient sources of gravitational waves. However there are theories that suggest much stranger objects, at least in the early part of universe, such as domain walls, bubble universes collision of whom could produce much stronger signals. Since they expected to be happened long time ago (and far away) they would still only produce small effects on LIGO detectors compared to closer black hole binaries.

SK, postdoc, data analyst/instrumentalist

Question :Why should we care what LIGO does (serious question)? What practical usefulness is it to us here on earth? 

Answer :Check out this thread from earlier today:  https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/4odza8/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_the/d4bpn8n

Question :I know it's not the same field as what the LIGO team study, but I'm curious as to your thoughts on the recently published paper regarding the proposed EM drive's 'exhaust', explaining how it doesn't break Newton's third law?

http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/adva/6/6/10.1063/1.4953807

P.S. - Thank you for all that you do! You're opening up a new sensory organ for the human race to explore the universe with.

Answer :As you've said, this paper is on a very different topic.  What I can say, after having a very quick look, is that it is certainly true that momentum conservation and Newton's third law are obeyed, so any claim to the contrary is going to be wrong.  That said, based on the description given here, such an "EM drive" should not generate thrust.  Perhaps this is just due to their description, and the actual device (which I know nothing about) operates differently? The only other thing I can add is that their description of how two photons interact is very inconsistent with my own understanding, in which two photons *don't* interact at all in the simplest approximation at which they seem to be trying to work (called linear order, which by definition is the order at which the electromagnetic field does not interact with itself).  Therefore, the momentum and energetic properties of a system of two photons won't depend at all on where they are, even if they are located at the same place at some instant.  Now, photons can interact at higher orders, for example in certain astronomical settings, but that requires vastly higher energy photons than what, I gather, is being considered here.

STM, Professor, source modeling and astrophysics

Question :What is the significance of turning the gravitational wave into a sound? What do the sounds represent exactly?

Answer :
There is an answer to a similar question here https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/4odza8/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_the/d4bsxso

There may be more to follow on this from a colleague.

KAS, professor, instrumentalist. 
edit - tidy up

Question :Would a giant alien spaceship (1/4 mass of moon) suddenly appearing at the Moon's distance cause a gravity wave event detectable with your instruments?

Answer :Interesting question.  The first problem is that we don't know (in physics, rather than science fiction) how to make a spacecraft suddenly appear.  If we try to calculate a more realistic approach into an orbit near the moon, the signals would be too low in frequency for our detectors.  

The signals we see come from black holes only 10s of km across moving at close to the speed of light.  With less exotic systems it is hard to make gravitational waves reach the frequencies we can detect.

KAS, professor, instrumentalist. 

Question :Do you have plans for the next generation of gravity wave detectors and what kind of resolution would they have?

Answer :Yes, there are plans for several future generations of ground-based detectors with ever improving sensitivity, first by improving the components at existing sites, then by building completely new facilities with longer arms and improved components.  There is also a plan to launch a detector into space (called LISA or eLISA, which was discussed above), which would allow us to get away from the noisy Earth and measure signals at lower frequencies.  In terms of resolution, that's actually a fairly involved question, as it doesn't only depend on the detector sensitivity, but also on the number of detectors, since the more detectors that are spread around the world (or throughout space :-) ), the better we can localize.  The goal would be to eventually localize sources to individual galaxies, which will require pinpointing to arc seconds on the sky, but we have a long way to go to reach that point.

 STM, Professor, source modeling and astrophysics

Question :Is it possible for these merged black holes to merge with another one? And is there any practical use for this on Earth?

Answer :Yes, it is possible but it probably will not happen anytime soon.  Even if they merged in a dense star cluster containing other black holes, it might take millions of years to join up and form a binary with another black hole.  And in most cases, the separation distance in the new binary will be too large for them to merge.  Only in some cases, when they happen to form a particularly close binary orbit, will they radiate gravitational waves strongly enough to spiral together and merge in a reasonable amount of time (like, the age of the universe).

PS, professor, data analysis and astrophysics

Question :Thought you said Lego now I'm here. How's your day going so far?

Question :Would having a gravitational wave detector in orbit have any benefits such as reduced noise?  How long would the arms have to be compared to the one on earth?

Answer :Yes!  Noise from ground vibrations, feeding in through the mirrors' support structures, is one of the major noise sources for LIGO and other gravitational wave detectors on the surface of the earth.  We call is "seismic noise".  We have put a lot of effort into engineering ways to isolate the mirrors as much as possible from ground vibrations, but it still makes LIGO insensitive for frequencies below about 20 Hz, currently.  We call this the "seismic wall"!

A gravitational wave detector in orbit avoids seismic noise, and the arm lengths can be made very long.  The most fully developed concept for a space-based gravitational wave detector, called eLISA, is envisioned to have arms 1 million kilometers long -- not because they *have* to be that long to work, but because longer arms make the detector more sensitive to gravitational waves, all other things being equal.  One consequence is that eLISA will detect different signals than LIGO does; because of the long arms, eLISA's frequency band is roughly 0.001 to 1 Hz, compared to LIGO's ~20 Hz to ~3000 Hz (and similar for other ground-based detectors).  That's fine -- we expect that there are lots of interesting signals in eLISA's lower frequency band.  Another mission concept, DECIGO, is being studied which would have arms 1000 km long and would cover the frequency band in between eLISA and LIGO.

PS, professor, data analysis and astrophysics

Question :I'm currently a sophomore physics major and I am curious into the application of gravitational waves to look into the early universe, maybe for research in the near future. I believe an application of detecting gravitational waves is to look far back into the early universe right after the Big Bang. Could using "gravitational wave telescopes" help us look beyond the Cosmic Microwave Background, and into the very early universe before it was opaque? If so, how and when do you think you would be capable of doing that?

Answer :Good question!  Yes, we do search for gravitational waves left over from the early universe using data collected by LIGO and other gravitational wave detectors.  If we can detect it, it tells us about the flow of matter and energy in the early universe, when a lot was happening rapidly.  And yes, it *does* look beyond the time when the cosmic microwave background we see today was emitted, about 380,000 years after the big bang.  That makes it a unique probe of the early universe.  Here's a summary of an article we wrote about it a few years ago: http://www.ligo.org/science/Publication-S6VSR23StochIso/index.php .

However, it might be the case that the gravitational waves from the early universe are simply too week for LIGO to ever detect; the standard "slow-roll inflation" model for the evolution of the universe would've produced waves that are extremely weak today.  On the other hand, we don't know if that is the right model and we want to test it; there are some alternative models that could lead to detectable signals.  So we will continue searching as we improve our detectors and collect more data.

PS, professor, data analysis and astrophysics

Question :So is it anything like how earth quakes can help study the earths interior? I was wondering if it could tell you anything about the interior of the black hole because what confuses me is if these things are spheres does stuff just spiral down equally to an infinite point at the centre... Please excuse my infinite stupidity I have a very basic understanding of what is what out there

Answer :The thing about black holes is that we can't find out any information about the centre. This is all 'hidden' from us inside the 'event horizon' of the black hole. This is the perimeter from beyond which no light or mass can escape the gravity of the black hole.

The 'singularity', what I think you mean by 'infinite point,' is inside this horizon at the centre of the black hole, but the horizon itself has a size dependent on the mass of the black hole.

If we detected gravitational waves from another type of object without the strange properties of a black hole, we might be able to use the signals to discover things about the interior of the star.

We hope to detect merging neutron star binaries with Advanced LIGO and seeing gravitational wave signals from these would tell us about their structure.

JW, grad student, experimental interferometry

Question :How did you feel when you detected it?

Question :Was there anything different from the first detection? Also I'm curious, how long ago would the actual merging have occurred?

Question :Will gravitational wave detection accelerate the research of warp drive? If yes, How many years it will take for a person to make intergalactic travel using warp drive?

Question :How did you feel when you first detected gravitational waves?

Question :How many 5-year olds do you think you could take in a fight? Both individually and as a team

Question :How do the gravitational waves affect the universe..?

Answer :Gravitational waves are disturbances in space-time itself, and we measure them by carefully measuring the distances between objects.  
All accelerating masses generate gravitational waves and as those gravitational waves pass by, the space between objects shrinks and stretches imperceptibly.  Only the most violent events, like the mergers of black holes, disturb space-time enough that those changes in distance are measurable.  Adding together the tiny contributions from all of the immeasurable gravitational waves, and there should be a background "hiss" of gravitational waves--as if the whole Universe was continuously, randomly, vibrating.  This background of gravitational waves is a very interesting source to try and measure, and there are a variety of experiments (pulsar timing, polarization of the cosmic background radiation) working to detect different parts of this spectrum.  LIGO searches for a background as well, and it is possible that when we reach full sensitivity we will detect a background form countless black hole mergers that are too quiet to individually measure.

TBL, Research Scientist, Data Analysis / Astrophysics


Question :[deleted]

Answer :The LIGO scientific collaboration has never attempted a Moon landing mission. I think you have them confused with NASA. If you are capable of launching a Moon landing mission in less than five years, then I look forward to seeing you there. Good luck.

Question :It may be difficult for the public to grasp your work, resulting in wild misunderstandings. They may not understand the importance of your work, the significance of your outcomes, or the difficulty inherent in your tasks.

**What would you like the world to understand clearly about what it is that you're doing?**

Answer :As an optics/measurement person, NA's answer is also in line with mine - that's a breath-takingly precise measurement!!!  But I think a lot of people are also motivated by verifying Einstein's general theory of gravity - gravitational waves (GW) are one of the few predictions he made that haven't been directly verified yet.  A third thing I'd add is that observing GW will let us "see" parts of the universe that are currently hidden from us.  Places like accretion disks, dust clouds, beyond (before) the Cosmic Microwave Background are places in the universe where light can't get through but GW can.  We expect to learn quite a bit when observing these things becomes common place. (GO)

Question :I'm curious to know whether gravitational wave astronomy could aid in the better detection and understanding of dark matter?

Answer :There was a calculation done by Dr. Valera Frolov to see if LIGO can detect certain kinds of dark matter if it passes through our detector. This would have nothing to do with gravitational waves, but the dark matter would still have a gravitational pull on our end mirrors. Though the WIMP model of dark matter (the current favored model) does not predict dark matter to form clumps, Dr. Frolov asked anyway: "what if a clump of non-standard dark matter moved through LIGO?". The answer is that the signal would be small, but not impossible to see! For more information, see Dr. Frolov's talk [here](http://www.gravity.ircs.titech.ac.jp/GWADW2014/slide/Valera_Frolov.pdf). (MT)

Question :Can you explain how LIGO works? How does it differentiate between gravitational waves and other types of signals? If you detect these gravitational waves what does this mean for the understanding of gravity and what would come after the detection?

Answer :Excellent questions! Let's address them in parts: how LIGO works, how it differentiates signals, and what it would mean to see one.

HOW LIGO WORKS

LIGO's name describes how it works. The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory, can observe gravitational-waves with an interferometer, which uses a laser.

Interferometry compares phase by interfering light waves. LIGO is a Michelson interferometer. First, laser light goes to a beam-splitter at the "vertex" or corner of an L. Half the light goes down one 4 km (2.5 mi) arm ("the X arm"), hits a mirror, and returns; the other half of the light goes down another 4 km arm ("the Y arm") that's perpendicular to the first. To make it more sensitive, we installed additional mirrors at the vertex of the L, so the light reflects hundreds of times in the arms, making its total path hundreds of kilometers. These mirrors form Fabry-Perot cavities (or if you're really hard-core into optics, a Gires–Tournois etalon).

Light returning to the beam-splitter from the X arm interferes with light from the Y arm. We fix the length of the mirrors so that the light spends just long enough in each arm that the peaks from one arm cancel against valleys in another. Seen from the photodetector that measures the light, on the side of the beam-splitter opposite the Y arm, this is destructive interference, so ordinarily there is no light coming out.  (If you're worried about energy conservation, never fear - that light goes back out the way it came in and used for other technical diagnostic purposes.)

When a gravitational wave passes through, it stretches/squeezes the space in the arms. We usually think of this a "perturbation" (a small change) in the metric. A gravitational wave coming from above (Z) will alternately stretch and shrink the metric along the X & Y dimensions -- and whenever X shrinks, Y stretches at the same time, and vice versa. So the time spent, and the relative phase of light, changes between the two arms. Destructive interference thus becomes partly constructive: we see some light at our photodetector. The power is proportional to what is called the gravitational-wave strain. Strain is how much stretching & shrinking space is doing. We might measure strains on the order of a few parts in a trillion-trillion!

There's also a pattern that describes how the phase changes when the wave doesn't come directly from above; this affects the observed amplitude of the gravitational wave, which can sometimes help us tell where it comes from -- especially when compared with another, distant observatory, where the way may have arrived earlier or later, which can help us triangulate the point of origin.

That's the core of how LIGO works. There are also some clever techniques, such as re-using the light headed back toward the laser called power recycling, as well as signal recycling.

TL;DR, how LIGO works: gravitational waves stretch space, change relative phase between light beams.  We have a little bit of directional information (where the wave came from), but mostly a single interferometer just rings like a bell when a Gravitational Wave (GW) goes by.  In the future we hope to get directional information by triangulating with multiple observatories around the world.

SIGNAL DIFFERENTIATION

How do we differentiate between gravitational waves and other signals? First, we work very hard to eliminate other types of signals! The interferometers are seismically isolated with multiple active and passive stages, so when the ground moves our mirrors do not (for the most part - big earthquakes can still cause problems, and when they happen our data is corrupted and un-usable until they have gone). That still leaves all sorts of other noise.  We see quantum noise which we reduce by using a powerful laser, thermal noise in the mirrors and suspensions which we handle with special coatings & materials, and other artifacts such as lines and glitches which are notoriously hard to characterize.  We do our best to reduce the latter sources and to find clever ways to distinguish between interferometer pops/clicks/creaks and actual gravitational wave signals.

There are many ways to reduce those other artifacts that look like signals. We do Detector Characterization to track down and eliminate some of them. Sometimes we find a clean room fan's been left on, or that a dam many miles away started unleashing water -- or we find that the same high winds bringing in tumbleweeds are also shaking the ground! If we can do something, we take action to eliminate the noise.

After a putative signal's seen, we compare against other instruments (if they were active) and against known noise sources to see whether it might be real.  Every once in a while part of the interferometer will creak or glitch in a way that looks vaguely similar to a GW, but since these things are small local events it is unlikely that they will happen at exactly the same time in detectors that are separated by thousands of miles (like the LIGO facilities in Livingston, LA and Hanford, WA are).  That doesn't mean it's impossible to see things randomly happen at the same time, so this requires good understanding by each of the analysis groups about how likely each of their methods is to trigger a "false alarm".

TL;DR, how signals are differentiated: keep it very very quiet, compare instruments that are far apart.

MEANING OF DETECTION

What would this mean for gravity? It is complicated! We hope to discover the unanticipated! There is a possibility we could discover that gravity is not quite as Einstein predicted in General Relativity; maybe gravitational waves have additional polarizations or travel at a speed other than the speed of light. Collaboration with our colleagues in electromagnetic and neutrino astronomy will help to learn the answer! But even if gravitational waves are what we expect from General Relativity, there is a whole new field of astronomy to explore. We expect we'll be able to see what happens when neutron stars or black hole merge, or deep inside a supernova; we might see bumps on neutron stars and learn about the structure inside them. We might even see a background of gravitational waves from the Big Bang (probably not with this generation of detectors, but GW detection could be a way of getting this information that wouldn't be available any other way).

And that's just with LIGO -- other wavelengths/frequencies of gravitational wave observatory, such as pulsar timing experiments and space interferometers, would make our view of the gravitational sky more complete. Just as radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible, ultraviolet, X-ray and gamma ray astronomy use different instruments, each providing a unique view of electromagnetic waves in the cosmos (and each yielding wild unexpected discoveries when they started!), we hope to eventually see a wide spectrum of gravitational waves with many techniques. A whole new field of astronomy should come after first detection, since GW aren't just another part of the electromagnetic spectrum, they're a whole new spectrum!

TL;DR, meaning of detection: might learn new things about General Relativity, hope to open another window on universe.

Overall TL;DR: huge question! It sees how space stretches, we compare instruments, and we seek the first glimpse of the gravitational-wave sky.
-GM, GO

Question :Science AMAs are posted early to give readers a chance to ask questions vote on the questions of others before the AMA starts. 

The LIGO Team are guests of /r/science and has volunteered to answer questions; please treat them with due respect. Comment rules will be strictly enforced, and uncivil or rude behavior will result in a loss of privileges in /r/science.

If you have scientific expertise, please verify this with our moderators by getting your account flaired with the appropriate title.  Instructions for obtaining flair are here: [reddit Science Flair Instructions](http://www.reddit.com/r/science/wiki/flair) (Flair is automatically synced with /r/EverythingScience as well.)

Question :Hello amazing scientists of the LIGO experiment!

How is your organization funded? 

I would love to help contribute to amazing experiments like the ones you are creating.

Answer :LIGO is funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and is a collaboration of hundreds of scientists and engineers. In addition, for the construction of Advanced LIGO, we had contributions of in-kind equipment and expertise from the UK, Germany, and Australia. If you would like to get involved check out Einstein@Home: www.einsteinathome.org (JK)

Question :Ever more sensitive instruments have been developed to detect gravity waves, from Weber's aluminum cylinders to the latest version of LIGO. To my knowledge, there's been no direct detection of gravity waves so far. 

Does the unexpected(?) weakness of gravity waves imply anything about Relativity or provide any new insights into the theory? 

Do you think that there's a chance that it will require a space-based instrument to finally detect the waves with the sensitivity to open up a new field of observational astronomy?

Answer :Right, there hasn't been a direct detection of gravitational waves (GW) yet. But this is not necessarily because we have seen an unexpected weakness in gravity. The facts are these: a) Gravity is known to be really, really weak compared to other forces in the universe b) we don't know precisely where, when and how often the major source events happen in the universe (we are trying to detect gravitational waves emitted by systems where huge objects - a few to dozens of times the mass of the sun - rotate and whip around each other at crazy fast rates - hundreds to thousands of times a second - and how often these things happen is not terribly well known) and c) Our instrument has not been sensitive enough to see very far out in sky. Initial LIGO was able to look for such events as long as they occurred within 15 Megaparsecs of us, and we didn't see any. Advanced LIGO should be able to see out to 200 MPc. This factor of ~10 increase in sensitivity distance corresponds to a factor of 1000 times more space we can see, and where initial LIGO just started to be able to see things happening in the nearest galaxy cluster, Advanced LIGO (if I recall correctly) will be able to see things happening in multiple galaxy clusters. For full-sensitivity Advanced LIGO, around 2017 to 2018 or so, binary neutron star mergers should happen with [event rates](http://arxiv.org/abs/1003.2480) between 0.4 to 400 times a year -- with 40 per year believed most likely! As far as the space based detector, it may indeed have significantly better sensitivity, but the frequency band at which space based instruments (like the proposed LISA) operate is vastly different than that of LIGO.  LISA would be looking for different physical sources, so the event rate would be different.  We may very well win enough in sensitivity to detect easier out there, but there are certainly added difficulties and waaaay higher costs to going out into space.  (NA, CL, GM)

Question :Hi LIGO!  Didn't expect to find you here today.  This is Adam Day from Classical and Quantum Gravity.  I have been thinking a lot about visualising black holes recently. My question is:
Will gravitational wave detection allow you to make accurate visualisations astrophysical events?

Answer :Hi Adam! That sort of question might be best answered by Kip Thorne, who co-authored a [recent paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03808) in your journal! But we expect several kinds of ""visualization"" to be possible with gravitational waves, both audio and visual.

For those not familiar with the [gravitational-wave sounds](http://web.mit.edu/sahughes/www/sounds.html) simulated by Scott Hughes, they're a good listen. Such big events as black hole mergers are surprisingly meek-sounding.

Visual kinds of interpretation are possible too. We can localize where sources are on the sky to make a kind of map, both for transient signals and persistent ones. We've already published some views of the sky, albeit fairly plain in the absence of signals, and we hope they become more interesting when we have detections.(GM)

Question :Hello and thank you for taking the time to do this AMA. I have worked a little on interferometry software packages for such experiments and I have a question concerning the sensitivity of the experiment.

If memory serves, the spatial fluctuations caused by gravity waves are thought to be very minuscule (I heard an extension not dissimilar to the width of an atom over an Astronomical Unit). Is this true, and if so, how can the experiment measure such small fluctuations given the limitations on measuring and thermal/seismic noise?

Answer :This is a really excellent question! Despite the fact that the atoms in the coating of the mirror are all jiggling around from thermal fluctuations, the laser spot size is so large that it effectively averages over all this jiggling. This allows LIGO to measure the *average position* of the surface of the mirror[1] to distances of 10^-18 m! IT also helps that this jiggling happens at certain frequencies ... so even though you don't know exactly where the surface of the mirror is, you can say with much more certainty how it's moving about at ~100 Hz frequencies (just as when you're on an airplane, there are very loud low-frequency rumbles, but you can understand what people say because your brain will ignore low frequencies and focus on higher ones).

[1] What's really being measured is a difference between two sets of mirrors' surfaces. Taking the difference is more accurate, because it's insensitive to the laser's phase noise.

Question :[deleted]

Answer :Addressing the question of when we can realistically expect the first detection, as pigeoncry correctly points out there are very many uncertainties involved, the most significant of which is the uncertainty in the abundance of binary systems containing compact objects (binary compact objects of bco's for short), where we are using the term compact object to mean a neutron star (NS) or black hole (BH). The most current estimates of rates for detectable BCO signals that I know of is given in [a paper by Michal Dominik et al][https://dcc.ligo.org/DocDB/0112/P1400047/004/msarxiv.pdf]. They predict the a range of rates for detection of compact binary signals by advanced LIGO operating an design sensitivity and with no budget for non-stationary non-Guassian noise. The ranges, which reflect the uncertainty in formation rates for the BCO systems, are : for NS-NS binaries from 1.1 to 3.3 detections per year, for NS-BH binaries from 0.1 to 4.4 detections per year, and for BH-BH binaries from 11.7 to 1553.5 detections per year. This sounds very optimistic for BH-BH binaries, but recall there is no budget for non-Gaussian noise. The detection of the BH-BH signals is the most sensitive to this type of noise, so these estimates might have to be reduce by an order of magnitude or more, depending on the amount and nature of the non-Gaussian noise. WA

Question :Thanks for doing this AMA. Is anything opaque to gravity waves?

Answer :It's really difficult to make something absorb gravitational waves! This is because gravity interacts so weakly. There's a classic calculation from Kip Thorne (from the Les Houches lectures 1982) which asks this question. The punch line of the calculation is that if you want to make something interact strongly enough that it will absorb gravitational waves ... it ends up collapsing into a black hole. Of course, black holes can absorb gravitational waves (if their frequency is short compared to the Schwarzschild radius).

Question :If nothing is detected, how will that shape your understanding? What would your next step be?

Answer :First, we'll keep looking! Over the years, we have made orders-of-magnitude improvement in our technology. In the 1960s and 1970s, bar detectors were developed by Joe Weber and many others; they were sensitive to gravitational waves that stretched space by 1 part in 10^16 (a strain sensitivity 1e-16) or so. Bar detectors improved their sensitivity literally a millionfold, but even so, no gravitational waves were seen -- almost surely because none were that big, not in Earth's neighborhood. 

Interferometers such as LIGO have become much more sensitive. They can also measure over a broad range of frequencies. Initial LIGO, by its final science run last decade, had a "strain sensitivity", at best, 2e-23 (lower is better!). Advanced LIGO, by the end of this decade, should be down to 4e-24 over a wide range. (And it is already better than Initial LIGO and getting ramped up for observations this summer). Each improvement increases the distance we can see into space -- and the number of sources seen scales with the cube of the distance. Coupled with seeing over a broader range, we expect Advanced LIGO to see about a thousand times more potential sources that Initial LIGO.

So it would be somewhat odd to see nothing. There are "pessimistic", "realistic", and "optimistic" scenarios for astrophysical sources. The latter two strongly suggest we should see gravitational waves with LIGO in the next couple years. It is possible for the pessismistic scenario to unfold, astronomers tell us, if there simply aren't enough neutron stars and black hole in the average galaxy for them to merge often. So, if we don't see anything, the significance would first probably be in astronomical models of star formation.

If, on the other hand, an electromagnetic or neutrino observation of an event indicated we should see it -- for instance, neutron stars merging that were definitely in a nearby galaxy like Andromeda -- then things would be interesting! We might start to suspect something odd with gravity. But extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence.

TL;DR: our next steps if we don't see anything are, at first, look harder -- because astronomers say they should be there. And if despite everything, there aren't, figure out whether the discrepancy is in astronomy or physics.
-GM

Question :Was it disappointing when LIGO's science runs failed to detect gravitational waves?  How optimistic are you that Advanced LIGO will achieve a direct observation?  When would you expect that to happen?

Answer :(GG) It would have been very surprising if we detected a signal in earlier science runs - but of course we were a little disappointed at the end, even though we did very good science with the absence of detections. I am certain that the Advanced LIGO detectors with the sensitivity we expect them to have WILL yield observations, the question is when, not if! We'll be lucky if it happens in the next couple of years, but it should happen in less than five years, depending on how long the team takes in tuning the detectors to achieve the expected sensitivity. 

Question :I have heard that much of the technology for the LIGO detector did not exist at the time that LIGO was first conceived.  What are some of the coolest technology innovations that were developed to make LIGO work?

Answer :From my hardware standpoint, the monolithic portion of the suspensions are pretty cool. The fused silica test masses are hung from fused silica fibers which are attached to a fused silica penultimate mass above it. So, the test mass and penultimate mass are effectively one monolithic unit. In order to build this, we draw our own silica fibers on site and "weld" them onto silica "ears" on the test mass and penultimate while in the suspension.  BW

Question :Thanks for the AMA! What are the primary differences between the LIGO interferometers and the [White-Juday interferometer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White%E2%80%93Juday_warp-field_interferometer)?

Answer :While the White-Juday interfeometer is the same setup as LIGO's interferometers (both Michelson interferometers, aimed at noticing phase differences of light), they aim to detect changes to spacetime from different types of sources. The White-Juday interferometer plans to manually warp spacetime, which could be difficult since the gravity is so weak. LIGO is trying to detect minute changes to spacetime caused by dense objects far off in space. (SU)

Question :Is a gravitational wave similar to the way we think of a wave in the ocean on earth? Do they usually exhibit a similar shape?

Answer :and if the ripples cross can they cancel each other out?

Question :[deleted]

Answer :You are definitely right about the noise sources! We have many, and our largest including seismic and, in Advanced LIGO, radiation pressure noise at low frequencies, below about 100 Hz, the thermal noise from mirrors and their suspensions around a few hundred Hz, and above that shot noise.

Each has solutions! Better seismic isolation, bigger mirrors, and more powerful lasers, respectively, reduce the noises -- choosing the right balance is complicated, but we invest in studying the relative benefit of each improvement. More seismic isolation unambigously lowers ground motion -- we support our mirrors with pendula, each stage of which dampens motion proportional to the inverse square of frequency. Advanced LIGO has four stages, in addition to external seismic isolation, and the mirrors are actively servoed. This means that ground motion is very minor for high frequencies -- and in advanced LIGO, we might be able to see from 10 Hz on up, if we succeed. Mirrors are big so that the spot size of the laser can be big, which averages out the roughness and thermal motion. But even so, vibrations in the mirror suspensions can cause noise -- so we make the final stage of the suspensions out of fused silica, which has an extremly high mechanical quality factor. Finally, we use a 200 W laser in Advanced LIGO, as strong as we expect to be able to use. Even so, we expect thermal distortions in the mirrors for which we have a compensation system of supplementary lasers and heaters.

But that's noise! How, fundamentally, so we get down to 1e-18 meters and below?

Basically, we measure phase with the power at a photodiode. The displacement may be 1e-18, but since light bounces back and forth in the Fabry-Perot cavities, hundreds of times. Moreover, the power is boosting by a recycling mirror. So whereas we have a 200 W laser, 800 kW or so of laser power are bouncing back and forth in the arms when LIGO is on. This reduces the phase shift with 1e-6 m light to more like 1e-9 (if my numbers are right!). Furthermore, we servo the instrument so there's (almost*) no power going to our photodiode in the absence of a signal, although the above noise sources cause some light to leak through. 


-GM

Question :A bunch of questions here (answers to any would be appreciated) 

How much information about a gravitational wave will you be able to deduce from LIGO? Are you just looking to confirm that they exist or will you be able to make other claims as well (like it's source, polarization, etc)? 

How do you sort signal from noise? I'm sure there are a lot of sources of vibration other than gravitational waves. 

Given the last question, why aren't you guys doing this out in space where there is (I'm assuming) less noise? 

Is there any hope that your results will be able to make any claims about inflation (thinking about the whole BICEP2 fiasco)? 

Finally, if gravitons are real, around how many of then would correspond to the kind of waves LIGO can detect? 

Thanks for having this AMA 

Answer :*IF* the gravitational field is quantised, and so gravitons exist, then any gravitational wave detectable by LIGO would contain at least 3x10^37 gravitons (that’s a 3 with 37 zeroes after it). That’s rather a lot. It means, however, that with a detector like LIGO we have no hope of detecting individual gravitons, since we would need a detector at least 3x10^37 times more sensitive. I think our engineers would be a little upset if we asked them to make those improvements...

[source: http://publications.ias.edu/sites/default/files/poincare2012.pdf] (AW)

Question :[removed]

Question :How does the proposed LISA experiment differ from LIGO? (other than being in space)

How likely is it that LISA will ever actually happen?

Answer :The wavelength range and therefore target sources to study are different (see the [spectrum](http://www.tapir.caltech.edu/~teviet/Waves/gwave_spectrum.html)).

As for likelihood, I've been told that eLISA might be expected in the 2030s range, which is honestly not a good indicator...

Question :Do you have predictions on the frequency range and intensity of gravitational waves? How does one model such waves and how much input information is required about the universe? If model predictions exist, how do those inform the experiment design and required sensitivity of the detectors?

Answer :Yes! Depending on the gravitational wave source in question, we generally get predictions for the gravitational wave emission by applying perturbation theory to Einstein's equations, or by running numerical simulations of the source.  Binary systems comprised of compact objects (e.g. neutron stars, black holes) can be modelled well during the 'inspiral phase' (while they are orbiting eachother) using a point-particle approximation and post-Newtonian corrections, so we have analytical models for the waveform morphology from this source. However, these approximations are only valid in the weak-field regime of gravity, and so do not apply during the merger of the two compact objects, and so numerical simulations must be run to determine the gravitational waves during this period. Core-collapse supernovae are another great example of a gravitational wave source that has a ton of crazy, messy physics going on, and so we must use numerical simulations here too to predict the waves expected. LIGO is most sensitive to gravitational wave frequencies between 10Hz--2000Hz, which means that the most likely source for gravitational wave detection is the inspiral, merger, and ringdown of compact binaries. A neat infographic on the gravitational wave spectrum and potential sources is located here: http://www.ast.cam.ac.uk/sites/default/files/assets/images/research/cosmology/gravitational_waves/GWspec.jpg (SG)

Question :Is it true that the 4 km vacuum tubes evacuated to a billionth of an atmosphere have had no detectable leaks over the years of operation?

Did this require any customized industrial vacuum pump to achieve or was this done with "off the shelf" technology?

Thanks!

Answer :In fact, there have been some corrosion related leaks to the LIGO beam tubes, however they have been managed. Both the Livingston and Hanford sites have vacuum teams which monitor and maintain the vacuum volumes.  All of the equipment used to pump down the LIGO 
volumes are off-the-shelf components.  However, the vacuum qualification system is somewhat custom. BW

Question :What do you think of LISA ? (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser_Interferometer_Space_Antenna for people)

Answer :The (e)LISA mission would operate in a completely different frequency band from LIGO. The two would be very complementary. This question is like asking optical astronomers what they think of radio astronomy or x-ray astronomy. It's great that you can learn something new about the universe in a different frequency!

The primary sources for LIGO would be binary star systems composed of neutron stars and/or stellar-mass black holes. In contrast, the primary sources for (e)LISA would be supermassive black hole binaries, like those which should happen after two galaxies merge; or extreme mass-ratio inspirals, where a stellar-mass object spirals into a supermassive black hole. All of these different types of signals can tell us something different about astrophysics, cosmology, and whether general relativity is correct.

Question :What would be the most interesting negative result once advanced LIGO is online? Obviously we might have to wait a long time for a compact binary merger or a supernovae, but immediately after advanced LIGO is on, what are we convinced that we should see (perhaps nearby white dwarf binaries? surface oscillations of nearby neutron stars?), and what would it mean to *not* see it?

Answer :(GG) We plan to have a short (~3 months) observing run later this year. We'd have to be very lucky to observe the coalescence of a binary system, but there could be surprises: for example,  if there is a short gamma ray burst (GRB) localized within our detectors' range and we don't observe anything, astrophysicsts would begin seriously doubting their favorite theory for GRbs (or the localization of the events). 

Question :[deleted]

Answer :Greetings there! Some of these questions are [answered](https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/2vrcdm/science_ama_series_were_scientists_of_the_ligo/cokjfd2) here too, but in general we have an idea what's out there. We're hoping for even more that is unexpected, but knowing that there are probably...

* coalescing neutron stars and black holes, inspiraling together
* supernovae
* neutron stars with bumps and internal vibrations and accreted companions
* the stochastic background of the universe

... helps us to design analyses. If we have an idea what the waveform is, we can look for it even if it is much smaller than the average noise -- because what matters is how many "false alarms" match, not just noise at a given frequency, but noise of that particular waveform. Even though Advanced LIGO's best sensitivity will be about 4e-24, that is, four parts in a trillion-trillionth, rather noteworthy already, we might do a hundred times better than that looking for very specific signals from some pulsars. The more data we have, the deeper we can go. 

For merging stars as well as neutron stars emitting their own gravitational waves, we can model thees waveforms. For supernovae and the stochastic background, we often combine the output of detectors and compare against each other -- which indeed is useful for confirming, or making more sensitive, the other analyses too.

Lastly, electrical equipment itself can be tricky! There are a lot of subtleties about how much power to put on the photodiode during the measurement, how much analog whitening and anti-aliasing goes into the analog-to-digital converters, and other arts! But it's all calibrated -- multiple ways, including by tracing the chain of motion that goes into our mirrors as well as by pushing on the mirrors with a laser to measure the minuscle displacement caused by light pressure. The calibrations agree; we're quite sure the instrument is doing what it's supposed to be doing.
-GM

Question :Can I come visit you guys in Handord?

Answer :Yes! There are observatory tours (https://www.ligo-wa.caltech.edu/informal.html) and field trips (https://www.ligo-wa.caltech.edu/field_trips.html). It is really cool to visit the detector! -JK

Question :Hi LIGO! So the Wikipedia page on gravitational waves states: "In particular, gravitational waves could be of interest to cosmologists as they offer a possible way of observing the very early universe." Can you expand on that? What precisely can LIGO add to our understanding of the early universe, the Big Bang theory, etc.? 
http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational_wave

Answer :Gravitational waves offer a unique view into the very early universe because they can allow us to see "behind" the CMB. You may have seen ["pictures of the big bang"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmic_microwave_background), which are constructed from the light from the early universe that reaches us. But this light actually gives us an image of the universe 300,000 years after the beginning of the universe, not the very beginning. This is because before the 300,000 year mark, the universe was filled with hot ionized gas (meaning the electrons and neuclei were separate, just free electrons flying around, which is not what we see around us today), so photons would be scattered wildly by these ions, and get their directions and energies randomized before they can get to us, so they won't carry much information about their original source. Because the universe had been expanding since the beginning, it was getting cooler, and at around the 300,000 year mark, the universe was cool enough that the gas stopped being ionized, so free electrons combined with protons to form neutral hydrogen (we call this recombination), which scatters photons much less. For us, this marks the beginning of the period when photons actually can free-stream directly towards us from the early universe, with minimal scattering, so they can carry information about their origins. On the other hand, gravitational radiation does not care about this 300,000 year mark, because molecules of gas, ionized or not, have minimal effect on gravitational waves. This means that gravitational waves created before 300,000 year mark can stream right towards us without being disturbed along the way, which is why they can give us insight into the early early universe! (MT)

Question :If you were hypothetically granted, oh I don't know, 1/1000th of the cost of the Iraq War (equal to roughly $6 billion), would you build an even more gigantic laser interferometer? Or would it make sense to use a different method? Basically, how would additional funding affect the scales at which you could detect gravitational waves?

Answer :If we had more money, in the field, there are many things that would be wonderful!  Several pretty clear opportunities: 1)It would be good for gravitational wave astronomy and astrophysics if our colleagues in LISA -- and/or the other space-based gravitational wave detectors -- could receive solid funding. 2)  In pulsar timing, additional radio telescopes matched with refined receivers could help bring those observations to fruition more quickly and allow more astrophysics to be extracted. 3) Ever better Cosmic Background measurements, both from the ground and from space, can not only give more data to help determine if there are primoridial gravitational waves at a detectable level, but can do amazing cosmology as well. 4) Lastly, and near to our hearts, is the notion of building longer (so more sensitive) underground (so quieter) terrestrial antennas. We are looking forward to giving our funding agencies and the public a motivation by making the initial detections with Advanced LIGO, Virgo, Kagra, and India soon. 

These goals, however, are already beginning to be realized by prototyping and smaller-scale experiments. 
-GM/DS

Question :Thanks for doing this.

* Who will detect Gravitational Waves first? Interferometer guys or Pulsar Timing guys?


* Can you talk about the role of Japan, Italy and India. What they have delivered and what do you expect. And any general remarks about their collaborations.


Answer :See the other comments as well, but both experiments are subject to different criteria to make a detection. Interferometer side says that when Advanced LIGO turns on, there should be detections almost instantly. They will see individual event happening in real-time. Pulsar timing side says that if we accumulate more observations of an array of pulsars, both by adding more pulsars to the array and by increasing the time baseline, we can detect different signals of gravitational wave time series (ignoring certain burst sources, which some people are looking for). So the "game" of first, assuming everything works (ha), is this: can pulsar timing accumulate enough observing time before interferometry turns on (or back on, LIGO already had a run). That's a tough question to answer. But, as is mentioned elsewhere in the comments, they are complimentary, studying different gravitational wave signals and wavelengths, so it's not like one shuts out the other.

Question :Awesome! I've read about you in Kip Thornes book about Interstellar. My question to you:

How do you account for external influences that aren't gravitational waves? There are lots of micro earthquakes everyday and I'd reckon with an instrument that sensible it would surely catch those, which are probably a lot more intensive than gravitational waves!

Answer :You're right, there are a ton of noise sources other than Gravitational waves. Particularly seismic noise is a large problem for frequencies below 40Hz for iLIGO and abellow about 10Hz for aLIGO. It's combatted by a combination of active and passive seismic isolation. The passive works by dangling our "test masses" (the bit that the GW should wobble) from a pendulum. Advanced LIGO uses a pendulum on a pendulum on a pendulum. This way, only seismic noise below the pendulum system's resonant frequuency has a large effect on the test mass. Active isolation works by having a network of seismic sensors in the vicinity of the instrument. Based on what they see, and after some clever processing of waveforms, some electromagnetic actuators will try to move the test mass in such a way to counteract the seismic wave. Advanced LIGO's isolation is much better than iLIGO's, so we'll be able to see better at lower frequencies. We also have programs that we use to help figure out what's noise and what's a signal. For example, we've designed these programs to look for signals that appear in the data of multiple detectors simultaneously. (There might be a micro earthquake in Washington, but we wouldn't expect it to travel to Livingston faster than a gravitational wave!) While different programs do different things (and often look for different types of signals), they all have this type of simultaneity test and probability tests to filter out background noise. (BP & SU)

Question :When are you guys doing your first data run this year? 

I'm coming out there for the Joint Fermi/LIGO meeting in a month and I can't seem to find this answer anyway (at least, anything more clear than '2015').

Answer :While we are proud to have achieve "first lock" in both Hanford and Livingston observatories, several more months of commissioning are needed first! Our noise levels, while low already, should be even lower before taking scientifically-useful data. This summer is the plan! That's "Observing Run 1" (O1), for 3 months of data to take place in the Fall of 2015 (this year!), with O2 taking 6 months of data in 2016 and O3 tentatively planned to take 9 months of data in 2017. The schedule's been good so far, and we hope that continues!
-GM

Question :What's the craziest source of vibration/noise you've had to correct for? Quantum shot noise?

Answer :One of the noises that surprizes us the first time we (students) learn about it, but fascinates us thereafter, is the quantum noise.

The shot noise comes from the fact that the laser light we are using is "quantized", which is to say that it consists of photons. As it turns out, the light emitted from the laser, if we make it least possible noisy, still has some fluctuations in the number of photons and their arrival times. These fluctuations are caused by quantum mechanics, and are intrinsic to the quantum state of light. What this means is that we have some phase noise that enters our detector. 

Surprisingly though, the quantum noise that limits the aLIGO sensitivity is not the shot noise of the laser, but the shot noise on the vacuum on the un-used port of  the beam splitter. If you check the LIGO design, the laser goes through a beam splitter, and divides into two arms, but on the other side of the beam splitter, the input is nothing but vacuum. It turns out from Quantum Field Theory, that vacuum (no light) has some energy, and can add phase and amplitude fluctuations to the light that we want to detect!

There is research done on using "squeezed vacuum" instead of normal vacuum in that input, so we inject something which has lower fluctuations than the basic fluctuations in phase. This can be done by taking the phase fuctuations and putting them in the ampliude (or photon number) instead, since quantum mechanics only says that the product of these two fluctuations should be constant. (Heisenberg's uncertainty Principle.) (NA)

Question :LIGO has been in existence since the early 1990's, almost 25 years.

What would you say are the major results that LIGO has found?



Answer :(Not with LIGO) I could be wrong but I think most of LIGO's existence has been engineering phases.  This was the first time an interferometer that large has been built and so most of the time has been spent dealing with problems that arise because of the size - they had to learn how to build an interferometer that big first!  There is so much terrestrial noise that has to be dealt with so that the signal of interest isn't drowned out.  Previous phases of LIGO had ranges that were much smaller than advanced LIGO is expected to have and so the rate that a detectable event was expected to occur within this range was really small (a few per year maybe?).  With advanced LIGO it is expected to be much higher and so detections could occur weekly or monthly (I think).

Question :Hi LIGO! How do you plan to account for dust and debris in the atmosphere to avoid potential errors in data that happened with the BICEP2 experiment?

Answer :(Not with LIGO) Dust and debris do not posea problem for LIGO because gravitational waves, unlike electromagnetic radiation, interact very weakly with matter and so they will pass right through all of that dust without even noticing.  BICEP2 was looking for patterns in the CMB that were fingerprints of primordial gravitational waves.  The CMB is an electromagnetic signature and so dust and debris are a concern.

Question :I'd love an update on how/if Einstein@home has been useful on this project.

Answer :There have been a number of iterations through various data releases from original LIGO runs. The most recent runs have been with improved search methods, but since there hasn't been new data in the last few years, I'm not sure what the gravitational wave side of the project has been up to. A lot of time now is spent analyzing pulsar radio search data from the PALFA project at Arecibo Observatory and also from gamma-ray data via the Fermi satellite.

Question :What's in the center of a black hole?

Answer :The theory of General Relativity cannot predict what's at the very center of a black hole, the math actually breaks down (it produces a singularity, like you divide by zero). Everybody hopes that a theory of quantum gravity will solve this, but for now, it's only speculation. What Einstein's theory says is that no information happening inside the horizon of a black hole will ever get to anybody outside - so it would also be very difficult to test theories with experiments in black holes. The theory would have to be tested with other experiments, and then we'd believe the predictions for black holes. (GG)

Question :The speed of a wave in liquid is determined by the viscosity of the liquid.
What's the speed of a gravitational wave and why is it that speed?  What's the 'viscosity' of space?  As far as I understand, the 'viscosity' of space in terms of electromagnetism are defined by the permittivity and permeability constants, and thus electromagnetic waves move at speed c.  But what about gravity?    

Answer :[deleted]

Question :Can gravitational waves be redshifted like EM waves? If so is that both gravitational redshift and cosmological redshift that can take effect?

Answer :Absolutely right, GWs are redshifted almost exactly the same as EM waves (there are minor technical differences because one is a spin-one field, and one is a spin-two field).

Question :Squeezed states seemed like a promising avenue for gravitational wave detection since the 1980s (everybody cites [this 1980 paper from Caves](http://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.23.1693))...
Is it still the case? What are other promising techniques to reduce the noise? 

Answer :Squeezing has been successfully tested at both GEO600 and LIGO Hanford in 2011, after several decades of laboratory progress following Caves's paper. The [results of the Hanford](http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.0383) experiment were good, 2.15 dB of measured squeezing and sensitivity improvement -- that's improving the shot noise by a factor of 28%. That's also equivalent to the improvement yielded by a 64% brighter laser, but without the thermal distortions in the mirrors that such high laser power would cause.

A key limiting factor in squeezing now are the optical losses in each optic. While we may be able to generate 10 dB of squeezing on an optical table, we can just get out a fraction of that when the squeezing is incorporated into our detector. This is being actively studied.

We also hope to make squeezed states not just for reducing shot noise at high frequency but also radiation pressure noise at low frequency. This can be done using what are called filter cavities, and they are very promising indeed! We would like to be able to incorporate one in the next update following Advanced LIGO.
-GM

Question :Hi, very interesting work so far. I will be watching those videos later on today. Can you explain how and why the locations for the LHO and LLO were chosen and were there any other locations (or future locations) considered?

Answer :There are many criteria to how the sites were chosen. The sites have to be close to communities (groceries stores, schools, houses, etc.), they have to be close to airports, they have to have electricity, but isolated enough from anthropogenic activities (about 20-40 minutes drive from residential areas). Also we wanted the two sites to be far apart. LIGO scientists didn’t get to choose the site back then. They made a list of various places that matches the criteria but NSF made the call. Los Angeles and Maine were two other possibilities but Livingston and Hanford were the final call.   NK

Question :Hi LIGO, I am curious if anyone has read Loeb and Maoz's paper on the arXiv yet concerning gravity wave detection using atomic clocks spread over earth's orbit: http://arxiv.org/abs/1501.00996. I have not had time to do so myself but in principle it sounds relatively easy, or at least easier than a mile long vacuum chamber and interferometer.

Do proposals like this come out all the time or is it fairly rare that someone comes up with a feasible alternative to detecting gravity waves.

Answer :Thanks for the link - that's a very interesting article!

Question :What is the range of possible wavelengths for a gravity wave?

Answer :Like the electromagnetic spectrum, there should be a whole range of them, see the [theoretical spectrum](http://www.tapir.caltech.edu/~teviet/Waves/gwave_spectrum.html). 

Question :Gravitational waves mean not only is there something big causing them, but it's also *moving very fast*, correct? Not just any ole gravity well is going to emit gravity waves, if I understand things properly. 

Are you going to try to connect your data to a source - say, search for gravitational waves around a neutron star - or are you "going fishing", hoping to find *any* discrepancies between your two monitoring sites? Will you be searching for a distinct waveform? How clear a signal do you anticipate? 

Answer :I won't try to answer the second part for them since that's up to them, but for the first part the answer is not really. Gravitational waves are being generated throughout our solar system, they are just very, very low amplitude.

Question :1: Are gravity waves caused in today's universe by anything other than black holes or would any very massive collision or dual rotating bodies cause it.

2: doesn't gravitational strength obey the inverse square law? So, gravity waves from½ black holes starting out hundreds or thousands of light years away must be incredibly weak, right?

3: if 1 and 2 are correct, then wouldn't two rotating or colliding massive objects very close to the detector actually create gravity waves stronger than a distant black hole which could be detected as a way of checking the theory and calibrating the equipment ?

Thank you,




Answer :1. Yes, LIGO is also looking for things like Neutron Star-Neutron Star mergers. Also, things like "hills" on neutron stars could be a measurable source of gravitational waves with LIGO if they are large enough.

2. Not quite. It's actually proportional to the inverse of the distance, not the inverse of the square of the distance. See equation 2.34 [here](http://www.tat.physik.uni-tuebingen.de/~kokkotas/Teaching/NS.BH.GW_files/GW_Physics.pdf) (sorry for not a better source). But yes, they will be weak by the time they get to "us", where "us" is any number of gravitational wave experiments.

3. Yes, but we can't generate massive objects like that suddenly, so that doesn't help our experiments.

Question :How much would you be willing to bet that Adv. LIGO detects gravitation waves before 2016?

Answer :You will practically never find a scientist who's willing to place a bet on their research =P.  We all think there's a reasonable probability of success, hopefully even a very good probability, but even the best of us have had seemingly simple projects hit unforseen crazy roadblocks - nature just isn't always cooperative in giving up secrets!  Also we work really really hard to remain agnostic about results until they're very certain and checked and double-checked.  If you think you know what the answer is going to be, you're very liable to do things that influence the way your experiment turns out (intentionally or not).  Obviously as humans we can't remain perfectly unbiased, but we definitely try to avoid creating obvious biases by doing things like placing bets (or announcing what we think we might bet).  All that aside, the theoretical and astronomical predictions for Advanced LIGO look very promising, and the detectors themselves are already significantly beyond initial LIGO even though we've only just begun debugging the fully-assembled interferometers, so I'm pretty optimistic that it will be a very-not-large number of years. (GO)

Question :Is processing power enough of a bottleneck now, or do you expect it to be at some point, that I should donate my i7 (and GPU, when I replace mine) to Einstein@Home instead of protein folding, or should I just keep doing what I'm doing? Do any of you have any individual opinions on the relative merits of specific distributed computing projects?

Answer :Any contributions to the Einstein@home [distributed computing project](http://www.einsteinathome.org) are welcome!

Computing is a huge bottleneck for some searches and relatively quick for others. As I noted [earlier in this AMA](https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/2vrcdm/science_ama_series_were_scientists_of_the_ligo/cokl5ql), it helps us because some searches for continuous waves take many months, even with hundreds of thousands of users' computers helping. There are many subtle variations in the way neutron stars can spin -- which they can do hundreds of times per second -- that make a huge difference in how it is spinning months later. And our models have to fit the neutron star's gravitational waves over all those months of data. Hence, we have to test many models to get the right ones (and be very careful to exclude "false alarms", which happen when you run so many statistical "trials").

All that adds up to a lot of computing power. We are constantly trying to make our searches more efficient. The hard ones already use SSE, SSE2, AVX and other CPU extensions, and we are working -- including with some savvy programmer users -- to add GPU power to our code. Your computer is welcome!
-GM 

Question :What are the implication of *not* detecting gravitational waves?

Answer :See our responses to this question: https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/2vrcdm/science_ama_series_were_scientists_of_the_ligo/cokapsi

Question :As an undergraduate physics student, how do undergraduates get involved in projects like this, and how does it fit into their education?

Answer :I joined LIGO as a student worker at LSU working under the supervision of Prof. Grabriela Gonzalez. Working with LIGO help me put together what I learn from the classroom and truly understand how things work. Undergraduates can join LIGO via [SURF](http://www.ligo.caltech.edu/LIGO_web/students/SURF/) or simply by talking to professors in your physics department who are involved with the collaboration. There will always be something for you to do (NK).

Question :What is the expected magnitude of the gravitational wave signal and noise from your interferometers? In other words, how much phase shift do you expect to see?

Answer :The strain (~ delta L / L) for LIGO sources is expected in the [10^-21 -10^-22 range](http://www.tapir.caltech.edu/~teviet/Waves/gwave_spectrum.html).

Question :Gravity is often reffered to as tge weakest of the 4 fundamental forces, does this mean that the effects of gravitational waves would also be incredibly weak? Also at what kind of frequency do you expect to detect these waves? Thanks

Answer :Incredibly weak, which is why detecting them has been so difficult. You can see an expected wavelength spectrum [here](http://www.tapir.caltech.edu/~teviet/Waves/gwave_spectrum.html) (the frequencies are ~10^-19 Hz on the left and 100 Hz on the right).

Question :Many astronomical events can be detected in multiple ways. A supernova, for example, as gravity waves, EM radiation, and a burst of neutrinos. Many events may be so distant, though, that their signature in any one type of telescope is not statistically significant on its own. Do we have any system in place to correlate events between our best detectors of all kinds in real time to increase our total extraterrestrial event sensitivity? Is such an approach subject to statistical problems of some kind or impractical for any other main reason?

Answer :The name of this game is "multimessenger astronomy", and it's definitely a hot topic nowadays. While most astronomical observations are proposed and decided upon months or years in advance, there are lots of astronomical instruments which give observers time for "target of opportunity" observations when you don't know in advance that something important is coming. LIGO has agreements with a few other groups that they will try to do electromagnetic follow-up on minute timescales after significant triggers. Of course, nobody wants to waste anybody else's time or money, so you want to be pretty confident that a trigger has a high chance of being a real signal, and not just a noise fluctuation.

Question :Can modulated Gravitational wave be used for communication purpose?

Answer :So in a theory room at Caltech there's a little device that has a barbell with two metal spheres on either end, and when you plug it in the thing spins around.  It's got a label that says "GSZA-45 Gravitational Wave Generator".  Technically speaking when you turn it on it's a rotating system (with a time-changing quadrupole moment) that generates gravitational waves (GW).  However, if you do the calculation (as we all had to do in our general relativity class) you find that it emits 10^-48 watts of GW power.  That's not a number anyone will ever detect.  Light comes in little chunks called photons (the smallest indivisible bit of light energy), and theoretically gravity waves come in little chunks called gravitons... At that ridiculously small power, this gravitational wave generator puts out one graviton every 63 million years.  We can actually have an interesting theoretical discussion about whether that is "radiating", but the upshot is that nothing on the Earth, or even Earth sized will really put out detectable GW.  LIGO is straining the measurement capability of the human race and will just be able to detect things many times larger than the sun, whipping around each other thousands of times a second.  So unfortunately as far as we know right now, you'd need to be able to throw around sun- or black-hole-sized objects at insanely large speeds to actually make a wave that someone else might be able to pick up.  You can imagine the technical challenges involved... (GO)

Question :"How's Fred Raab doing these days? Good friend of mine." - My father 

Answer :"He's doing pretty good!"  -Me, Fred's Son

Question :What was the general attitude in the collaboration towards BICEP's (somewhat premature) announcement?



Answer :The BICEP2 team now believes the signal was dust or at least obscured by dust. That team, and a number of others, have more sensitive experiments underway or in preparation which (by e.g., using multiple frequencies for detection) can help to ‘pull out’ the dust and reveal the gravitational wave signal that might still be there.   It would be great if/when the measurement is made, and of very deep importance. It would be another very nice inference of gravitational wave radiation, like Hulse and Taylor, from the influence of GWs on astrophysical systems - we are looking forward to such a beautiful measurement! It is of course at a very very different time scale (once per universe birth rather than once per 1/100 second!), and it does not explore GR at extremely relativistic conditions with finite test particles. Also, being a once-in-a-universe-lifetime event, it is not a tool for a new observational astronomy of a range of sources. (DS and others)

Question :Some current questions:

1. Are gravitational waves only coupled with quadrupoles? There's been some talk of a "monopole" gravitational wave, but I have no idea if that makes sense.

2. Can we detect a difference between a gravitational wave from a 2-body system (binary neutron stars) versus a more complicated n-body system? Are there specific signatures?

3. Is there a limit to the earliest gravitational wave we can detect? EG: there were probably some very violent GWs in the early universe that got heavily red-shifted. Would those be detectable today, or they're usually not strong enough for aLIGO?

Answer :1. In GR, the mass quadrupole is the first moment that enters into the radiation calculations. All higher moments also enter—the current octupole, the mass hexadecapole, etc. In other theories (like scalar-tensor theories of the Brans-Dicke or more general Bergmann-Wagoner form), there is a long-ranged scalar field that can also radiate. The most important radiation there is scalar dipole radiation.
2. If you had a hierarchical triple system, and the inner binary was merging, you could potentially detect its acceleration due to the third body. That's the most plausible three-body effect I can think of. Any more complicated scenario would be extremely unlikely, and this one itself should already be pretty rare—because of the astrophysical formation mechanism required to make a compact object binary system.
3. aLIGO should see out to ~200Mpc, which is not very 'cosmological'.

Question :What kinds of things cause interference with LIGO? Do raindrops hitting the pavement cause problems? Since storms in the Atlantic prevent lock, I wonder how you cope with any local vibration.

Answer :(ZK) There are many, many sources of noise with which LIGO must cope. At higher frequencies in the signal spectrum, LIGO's "noise floor" is dominated by fundamental effects, such as quantum noise from photon counting error and thermal noise from the finite temperature of our test masses, but at the low end of the spectrum, our sensitivity is limited by the presence of seismic and other vibrational noise from the local environment.

In order to reduce the effects of ground motion, which is many orders of magnitude stronger than our expected signal, LIGO uses an intricate scheme involving many cascaded stages of active and passive isolation. The test masses themselves are suspended as the bottom stage of a quadruple pendulum system, the bottom half of which is a continuous piece of optical-quality fused silica. A pendulum has the nice property of isolating its suspended mass from the motion of its hanging point above the resonant swinging frequency of the system (to see this, hold an extended yoyo by its string and then shake back and forth at higher and higher frequencies---when you move very fast, how much is the yoyo moving?), and each of the four stages adds a layer. This quadruple pendulum is suspended from an optical table mounted on a two-stage isolation platform at the roof of the vacuum chamber housing the test mass. This platform is designed with sophisticated passive damping, and it also has a full set of actuators for active isolation via feedforward and feedback from an array of sensors located both on the platform and on the ground outside. Finally, this platform is mounted via flexible vacuum chamber walls to another, hydraulic actuation platform outside that is rigidly fixed to the ground. 

The LIGO seismic isolation system employs various nested control loops that map the various sensors around each test mass to the many actuation levels and degrees of freedom, both locally for each test mass and globally for the entire interferometer as a single unit.


Question :Will you need to filter out seismic noise? How will you do so? Did you need to develop new methods to do it?

Answer :Check out the link (given in the text above) about [seismic isolation](https://www.advancedligo.mit.edu/sei.html). All of the main optics are on seismic stacks which combine passive damping and active feed-forward damping (from seismic sensors); on top of these stacks, the optics are hung from multiple-pendulum stages, which roll of seismic noise to acceptable levels above 10Hz. The new advanced LIGO generation of detectors have major improvements in this area over the initial phase of LIGO. Initial LIGO only had a single pendulum stage instead of the quad stage used in advanced LIGO. Additionally, the initial LIGO design did not include active feed-forward seismic isolation (though the detector at Livingston did commission it during iLIGO).

Question :If a gravitational wave compresses one arm of the interferometer and stretches the other, it seems like this would affect the laser the same as it affects the space. So, how does this introduce a phase shift into the laser that produces a signal?

Answer :I am going to answer this question in 2 facets.

1. About light : The detection using interferometery is based on the assumption that the speed of light is fixed, even if the GW passes through where the light travels. That means that if my laser was travelling a length L, and taking a time L/c (corresponding to a phase acquired), it will take a time (L+dL)/c if the length is changed by dL by the GW (or any other noise). Since c remains same, and L changes, there is a diference in the phase acquired.
Hopefully I answered your question, but constant nature of speed of light is a deep question that goes into the basic foundations of Relativity!

2. About stretching and shrinking : Gravitational waves stretch or shrink the spacetime in the direction perpendicular to the direction of their travel. So if the GW was travelling in the z(forward) direction, the wave is going to stretch and shrink the space in the x-y plane (up-down and left-right). That can be seen as stretching in x and shrinking in y, and vice versa after some time.
That said, this is only going to stretch one arm and shrink the other arm if the wave is coming perpendicular to the detector, which might not be true in general. And this is not the design principle behind the detector. The detector is based on the fact that the gravitational wave will treat one arm different from the other (bonus, most noises should be common between the two arms and thus cancel out.). An example is that when GW is travelling in y direction, it will disturb the spacetime in x-z plane. So, in a way if our detector is in the xy plane, only the y arm would change and x arm would remain its original length. (NA)


Question :In your studies of gravitational waves, have you found found any evidence of self gravitational effects due to the expansion of the universe?  Kind of like how self inductance can influence the behavior of power systems?  I have always been curious if mass can affect itself gravitationally due to the expansion of the universe.  Thank you for your time.

Answer :Masses can and do exhibit self-gravitation effects, and it is one of the primary things that makes it difficult to predict exactly what the gravitational wave pattern from a small mass orbiting a much larger mass will create. The reason for this is that the bending of space-time due to gravitation can effectively allow a photon that was emitted by an object at a particular point in it's lifetime to re-intersect with that same object in the future. Since gravitational force is transmitted by gravitons, which travel in the same way that light does, that means that a masses past self can pull on it's present (and future) self. The technical term for this is gravitational self-force, and I've written a few papers on it, but unfortunately I can't find a good non-technical discussion of it anywhere to link here. Note that gravitational self-force is not specific to the expansion of the universe, although it is related to space-time curvature, which the expansion of the universe requires. A collapsing universe, or even a static curved universe would exhibit the same effect. WA

Question :Good morning and thanks for the AMA!

Two questions if you'll indulge me.

I've spoken previously with someone who interned on LIGO and they gave me a good understanding to the lengths you've had to go to eliminating noise from spurious sources. My first question then is once the noise has been accounted for and we have data that we believe result from gravity waves (assuming we get some) what methods do we have to correlate this data to stellar events?

More specifically, do we have models that predict what certain events should look like? Will we know "that's a binary orbit over there" versus "that's a collapsar forming"?

A different but related question is what capability do detectors like LIGO have to map the direction of an event? I have a vague idea but would like to hear from the experts. 

Answer :A lot depends on the "signal to noise ratio" (SNR). If somebody is whispering across the room at a loud party, you won't hear it. But if they're yelling right in your ear, you're going to know where they are and what they're saying.

A binary inspiral has a very distinctive signature—a chirp that sweeps up in frequency and amplitude. A supernova, on the other hand, is expected to have a pretty messy signature that has to do with the turbulent motion of fluid in the core of a dying star.

A pair of LIGO detectors works pretty much like a pair of ears work. Each one is pretty omni-directional by itself, but you can put them together to get a bit of information about the direction to the source (it could localize events to, say, tens of degrees on the sky, depending on direction and SNR). Including a third detector (like the European Virgo instrument) helps a bunch. Having a fourth detector in the Southern hemisphere would be really helpful, but we'll have to wait a long time for a fourth detector.

Question :Hi LIGO people!  I used to be a graduate student with Marco working on LIGO (I participated in Astrowatch).  I have moved on to working on atmospheric acoustics but I miss working there.  I was wondering when you guys would do an AMA.

My question:  What is the expected range for Advanced LIGO and with this expanded range, how often do you expect a gravitational event within LIGO's sensitivity to occur within that range?  I remember there was a handy graphic that showed this.  Also, when does the advanced LIGO science run begin?

[Hi Gabby!]

Answer :We have a couple excellent scientists named Marco working in LIGO, and glad you worked with at least one of them!

Primer on what range means for everybody: we often characterize the performance of gravitational wave interferometers by the distance to which they could see a signal, particularly a merger of two 1.4 solar mass neutron stars (of average orientation with respect to Earth, in an average sky location). We call this number the inspiral range (some other writers use horizon distance, which is similar by a constant factor), measured in parsecs (1 parsec is 3.26 light-years).

Advanced LIGO is designed for a range up to about 200 Megaparsecs (200 Mpc), although the obserbing run this summer is planned for only about 40 to 60 MPc. Compare that to Enhanced LIGO, which topped out at 20 MPc, or Initial LIGO, at about 15 MPc. With the full sensitivity, we hope for tens of events per year, by the "realistic" astrophysical predictions for the rate of neutron star and black hole mergers.

Here is a handy [graphic](https://www.advancedligo.mit.edu/graphics/aLIGO-reach-2.gif).
-GM

Question :To what extent does removing noise from the system determine the accuracy of the device? In the video it is mentioned that there are accelerometers at several spots. Will using those devices reduce the theoretical potential of the measurement? Lastly, 10^-18 was the measurement you needed to achieve IIRC. What is the theoretical limit of a measurement with the proportions of your device in an ideal environment?

On another topic, is there any discussion about LIGO being a stepping stone towards another type of device, or perhaps one with greater potential that anyone would like to share?

Answer :(GG) "Removing noise" from the detector is what we call "commissioning", and is what we are doing now... There are different kind of "noise": some we call fundamental, because they will limit the performance of the instrument as built: the quantum noise of the laser light, the brownian motion of the mirrors, the motion of the mirrors driven by the ground. If the detector is only limited by these well studied source sof noise, we say the instrument has reached its "design sensitivity". But there are many other sources of noise we can reduce (electronics, acoustic and magnetic couplings, ...). The sensitivity of the environmental sensors (like accelerometers) is not enough to subtract the noise from the detector, only to monitor the environment so we can "veto" events produced by the environment and not by astrophysical.  For Advanced LIGO, the design sensitivity would let us see events hundreds of millions of light years away. There are many scientists working on yet more sensitive detectors, which we will want to detect even more events and with better confidence - but Advanced LIGO's sensitivity should be enough to detect many events!

Question :What is the time scale associated with a single experiment? Seconds? Hours? How long will it take to process all the data from the experiments? How many measurements are you expecting to take before you can conclusively say that you detect gravitational waves? What kind of impact will the discovery of gravitational waves have on our understanding of physics? Thanks for doing this AMA

Answer :When we begin taking data in an "observing run", we will have the operators and scientists on 24/7 for months at a time - for example, we'll start a 3 month run later this year with the two LIGO detectors. Signals from the coalescence of a binary system may be observable for minutes or seconds (or fractions of seconds!), depending on the masses in the system; gravitational waves from supernovae explosions may take fractions of seconds. Rotating stars could produce continuous, periodic signals: they'd be there all the time, and that's why we can dig deeper for those. We plan to have definitive results from the analysis of the data within a few months, but we'll know about possible interesting bursts within minutes, so we can tell e.g. optical astronomer friends about those. If we see evidence of a transient gravitational wave and we are confident enough, it would be possible to publish a detection with just the results from the GW detectors. Gravitational waves that are loud enough will be strong tests of the theory of General Relativity: we can compare predicted and observed waveforms of black hole mergers, for example. The indirect (and beautiful!) detections by Hulse and Taylor of the binary pulsar did not test that domain of GR.  But the main benefit will be on astrophysical understanding: we'll have a census of binary neutron stars and small black hole systems in the Universe nearby - and small black holes are very difficult to find! - GG/DS

Question :Thanks for having the AMA. 
I want to ask about how big a measurement(from the optical sensor) you would expect, and will it be in the noise, subtly out of the noise(~1-3dB), or clearly out of the noise?( >5dB). for normal (day to day) gravity waves. 
Or will you only be able to detect rare, violent gravity effects ?

Also, what kind of treatments do you use to reduce noise? (mechanical/analog/digital?)

Thanks. 

Question :I visited the Louisiana facility and got a tour of the control room. It seemed the biggest problem was accounting for all the outside variables i.e. earthquakes, cars and people etc. If everything is accounted for and you all do experimentally verify this last part in general relativity, is there a known direction where this takes us, will
It lead into unknown scientific territory or is there an idea where this will lead? We discover gravitational waves which will lead to us being able to, blank...Or are we just trying to use gravitational wave  astronomy to get a better fundamental understanding of how things we know already exist truly work? 

Question :How do you actually generate a gravitational wave? I mean, assuming you set a baseline by measuring the laser interaction (however that works, I don't know, I'm a biologist) in the Earth's normal gravitational field, how do you then change that so that there's something new to measure? Do you have to move the entire set-up to somewhere with a different altitude or something? Do you place it next to a mountain?

Again, I'm a biologist, so physics beyond how it pertains to the life sciences is not my strong point. Sorry if this is obvious.

Answer :(Not a LIGO scientists but I will try)  Gravitational waves that LIGO is attempting to measure are created by objects like rotating black holes, binary star systems, supernovae, etc...LIGO isn't creating them on Earth to measure.  

[Link](http://www.ligo.org/science/GW-Sources.php)

Question :If they do exist, other than compressing space and thus changing distances, do gravity waves have any additional measurable effect upon matter? Would we be able to detect a gravity wave of sufficiently high amplitude on the macro scale, based solely on it's effects?

Question :Several people are asking about how you can get a handle on gravitational waves when the order of magnitude of the signal is so small in comparison to say, vibrations from the nearby highway.

Are there any tricks you think are super cool that are being used to identify useful data? I guess my real question is, why does signal recycling work?

Question :So I have been out to LIGO in Livingston and want to commend you on building a beautiful facility. I know there is extensive logging in the area  which can make these sensitive measurements difficult. Has this affected the detection  of G-waves. If so, will advanced LIGO help with this issue?

Question :What if gravitational waves are also particles?

Answer :One of physics' biggest issues is in combining quantum theory with relative theory, that is to say, there is no formulation yet for this, but there will be, hopefully, one day. Scientists only discovered light was a particle once they knew really quite well how to generate, manipulate and measure it. Perhaps LIGO is the stepping stone to discovering the Graviton! BP

Question :How do you plan to filter spurious signals especially the ones naturally and un-naturally caused here in earth?

Question :If someone were to place additional gravity wave detectors on other celestial bodies over the course of the next millennium, would that greatly expand our observational capability? Would it be possible to keep them synchronized with our current communications technology well enough to make the best use of the increased telescope span? If we were to place three detectors on Mars, what would the interplanetary bandwidth requirements of that be?

Question :If a detector were placed on the moon, I expect there should be almost zero mechanical noise transmitted through the crust, at least compared to our planet. Is it possible with current technology to design a sensor that could leverage that environment for greater sensitivity, or are you 100% satisfied with our current ability to filter out that kind of noise here on earth?

Answer :I don't think the moon offers any advantage compared to a free-floating experiment in space. The experiments basically consist of mirrors and detectors with laser beams between them. The longer the beams, the better. Making a huge interferrometer in space is simple - just put the mirrors and detectors in separate spacecraft and move them far away from each other. That's what LISA/eLISA plans to do.

They definitely aren't 100% satisfied with the ability to filter out Earth-related noise, but staying on earth is much cheaper.

Question :What would the implications be for modern physics if your research into gravitational waves failed to produce results? Would you simply try to find a different method to detect them, or would it establish that there are no such waves? If the former, then what would it take to disprove the existence of gravitational waves?

Question :Hi! I first heard about the LIGO project via the book ["Einstein's Unfinished Symphony"](http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/482381.Einstein_s_Unfinished_Symphony), which was published in 2003.

What has happened since then?

Question :Instead of trying to observe gravitational waves from far, far away places in the universe, why not try to observe gravitational waves from the Sun, or even the Earth?

Answer :This is a technically subtle point. First of all, yes, in principle there are gravitational waves generated from all orbiting systems. However, these are extremely weak unless the objects are compact (like black holes and neutron stars) and moving very fast (big fraction of the speed of light). The frequencies of interest in LIGO are from ~10 Hz to 1000 Hz, not too different from the range of human hearing. By comparison, Mercury takes 88 days to go around the Sun, so that is an incredibly low frequency. Now for the technically subtle point: the wavelength of that radiation (from the Mercury-Sun orbit) is so incredibly long that we are not in the "wave zone". We are too close to even be able to measure it as a wave—even if we could overcome all the technical challenges. Not because the signal would be too weak (and it would be ridiculously weak), but because from where we stand, it's not even a wave!

Question :I'm not trying to mock your work, but I was wondering what applications could we make from such discoveries? I.e. how could this help us in our space faring ventures? And can you explain further how this could help us in the understanding of the universe?

Question :with such high precision, how do you make sure tectonic plate movement or any terrain movements don't affect the results?

Question :What are your thoughts on [Jeremy England's reapplication](https://www.quantamagazine.org/20140122-a-new-physics-theory-of-life/) of the Laws of Thermo Dynamics? If accurate and life is an eventuality, wouldn't we start trying to detect other civilizations as they explore the cosmos with instrumentation similar to ours?

Question :Is it possible that gravity is actually a repulsive force that comes from space, and not an attractor that originates from mass?

Answer :(Not with LIGO) Well it does sort of "come from space" or more precisely "space-time".  Here is a quote that I love:

"Mass tells space-time how to curve, and space-time tells mass how to move." - John Wheeler

Question :If an alien race were to move the sun perpendicular to our plane a third of an AU and the moved it back in less than 8 minutes, how "large" of a gravity wave would we expect?

Question :Hi, thanks for taking the time to do this AMA!
What do you guys think is the most annoying source of noise and what steps do you think you can take to reduce that noise?

Question :Do you have a hard time tolerating stupid people?  

Question :Thank you for this post Ligo_Collaboration team. INCREDIBLE

Question :Was pretty sure the title said LEGO, got my hopes up. Stayed on the thread for the interesting answers none the less. Keep up the good work guys!

Question :Holy hell I heard about you guys this week in my physics class. By the way that's one hell of a facility you guys got

Question :I was able to do a tour of the hanford facility around 2004 with my high school class. It. was. AWESOME

Question :So wait, LIGO uses the acronym LASER in its acronym?

Question :How often are you expecting to see drastic events, such as supernovas or black hole mergers?

Answer :Table V of [this paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/1003.2480) says ~10 Neutron Star-Black Hole mergers and ~20 Black Hole-Black Hole mergers per year, with a big range. Sorry, I can't find the supernova rate or equivalently the volume they can probe at that strain right now. If I do, I'll edit, but maybe someone else can help.

Question :This is so exciting!  I'm a beginning student going into astrobiology.  Is it theoretically possible to break the fabric of spacetime?  Say, the merging of two supermassive black holes?  That would cause some massive gravitational waves.  I guess my quesiton is, does spacetime have a weight limit?  Will this be something you can answer with LIGO?

Answer :That's not quite the right way of putting it, but I think the thing you're looking for is the singularity at the center of a black hole. That's where the curvature of space is infinite according to general relativity. Gravitational waves are very low amplitude and do not curve space that much.

Question :If gravitational waves have yet to be detected, how will you know if the lasers are calibrated correctly and not just picking up interference waves?

Question :Given the sensitivity of Advanced LIGO, if it *doesn't* detect gravitation waves and obtains another null result, will that mostly just constrain astrophysics event rate or will GR's very prediction of gravitation waves start to be questionable? And if another null result is found, are their plans/funding for LIGO to continue to upgrade and push its detection threshold higher?

Answer :See this answer to a similar question: https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/2vrcdm/science_ama_series_were_scientists_of_the_ligo/coknqfn, and our two answers to this question: https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/2vrcdm/science_ama_series_were_scientists_of_the_ligo/cokapsi

Question :Why build LIGO on earth , when you can deal with much less stability problems in space?

Answer :There's a similar space-based project, [LISA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser_Interferometer_Space_Antenna).

Question :What kind of observation, if any, would give away the "graininess" of space, and what would be the consequences of this?

Question :Hey folks. 

Just to show how amazing this science can be can you create an analogy of how sensitive the phase shift detection is of one of your paths?

I think people don't appreciate how awesome interferometery is!

Question :So as far as I understood it, noone has ever detected grav. waves before even though they're predicted by the general theory of relativity, even though progressively larger and more expensive instruments were built to do so.

Again as far as I understood it, if grav. waves exist, they are literally waves of space bending. Thus bending light paths and everything else contained in this space. Why would they create a propagating point of non continuity of space time you could detect?

What did you say to convince people that this time would be different and they should give you the time and money to do this?

Why do you think this time will be different?

If there is a point where you would consider the existance of grav. waves falsified, where is it?

Does the device have other potential uses?

Question :I first learned about your experiments from Michio Kaku's books. You have a very neat tool! I hope you get a successful detection some day!

If you had a fantasy dream budget, what would your next facility be like? Hypothetically how much more could you do with it?

Question :What will happen once you detect gravitational waves? 

Question :If you discover that gravitational waves don't exist, what else can that equipment be used for? 

Question :I've casually read (I'm just a lawyer, not a physicist) that gravity wave experiments may help us confirm whether or not we live in a simulated reality.

For an outline of the simulated reality theory, check here: http://www.simulation-argument.com/

Here's an example of a Fermilab experiment that- as I understand it at least- essentially looked at the "resolution" of the universe to find "pixels," which would in turn suggest that we are living in a simulated reality.
http://www.gizmag.com/3d-hologram-universe-laser-fermilab-experiment/33546/

As far as you know, will your research have any implications for that area of inquiry, which I suppose might be deemed to be cosmology?

Or is this just "matrix woo?"

Answer :I've seen this, and I think the media handles the topic poorly. This site: [holometer](http://holometer.fnal.gov/faq.html) has a good explanation. 

Question :According to the Uncertainty Principle, we always affect that which we measure. When we detect gravity waves, how do we affect the source of these waves?

Answer :The [observer effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_effect_%28physics%29) is different from the uncertainty principle. When you detect gravitational waves, you don't affect the sources at all. They've left the sources a long time before.

Question :I was able to have lunch with Gabriela Gonzalez yesterday and go to her talk. I am curious, for advanced ligo will browning motion become a problem? What plans are in place to keep resonance consistent with minor movement in the earth? 

Question :What do you think about the new article that came out stating that dark matter is a flawed theory, since our perception of time changes wrt to our current position in it?

Question :What is the noise floor of your interferometers in terms of displacement and what wavelength did you choose for them and why? 

Question :What does a gravitational wave consist of that allows it to be observable?

Answer :Recall that GWs are not 'pure geometry without matter', like the grin
of the Cheshire cat but without the cat (Alice's observation).
Whatever they are, in order to be detected, GWs must be converted into
a 'cat' capable of interacting with some cat-measuring device. Trouble
is, the cat-measuring device requires localization of gravitational
energy *density* at a point, which in current GR is impossible. You
need quantum gravity. LIGO is for the birds.

Question :I did work for your group as an undergraduate! I did some work for my physics professor at Trinity university doing charge dispersion on fused silica optics! Really cool to read about all of this. 

Question :Do you feel that the lack of evidence of gravitational waves may lead to a paradigm shift from GR to another theory with a different explanation as to how gravity propagates? Perhaps with longitudinal waves caused by quanta of space time compressing their nearby quanta after interacting with energy? Thanks for doing this ama and exploring science!

Question :I recall reading that LIGO's sensitivity was capped at some minimum length, even though the equipment should have been capable of much better sensitivity. I interpreted this claim as the quantized length of the universe to be much higher than the Planck length.

Is my recollection about the LIGO's sensitivity correct? And if so, what about my interpretation of the quantization of length?

Thanks

Answer :(Not a LIGO scientist) I think what you are referring to is called the "quantum shot noise limit".

[Link](http://www.nature.com/nphys/journal/v7/n12/abs/nphys2083.html)

Question :I'm not even certain this question is relevant, and my apologies if too tangential...

A tennis ball will bend in its trajectory away from the racquet if hit obliquely, with spin imparted, so the ball rotates on its axis as it flies forward. This, I believe, is because of air resistance builds up greater in the direction of the spin than counter the direction.

Would an object sent spinning on its axis, on a straight-line trajectory through space, unperturbed by gravitation from nearby objects, also experience such a bend in its trajectory as spacetime or "ether" bunched up greater in the direction of the spin than counter the direction? Is that the kind of prediction we could make if we found evidence of gravity waves?

Answer :In flat, empty space, a spinning object would go in a straight line. In curved space, there is an effect, because spin angular momentum couples to curvature! We usually think of freely falling objects in GR as following straight lines (geodesics) in curved spacetime. Well, that's *almost* true for spinning objects, but the spin ever-so-slightly affects the motion. Basically, the spin provides a "handle" that curvature can latch on to and interact with. It's a subtle effect that most students in GR class won't even learn about.

Question :[deleted]

Answer :(Not with LIGO) I could be wrong but I think LIGO hasn't expected to really find gravitational waves until the newest phase coming up (Advanced LIGO).  Basically, the previous phase had a smaller range.  Small enough that the probability that a detectable event would occur within that range was also small.  I think with the newest stage and much bigger range they should be exposed to a higher rate of events.

There is pretty strong indirect evidence of gravitational waves already (see the [Hulse-Taylor binary](http://www.astro.cardiff.ac.uk/research/gravity/tutorial/?page=3thehulsetaylor)).

I would imagine that if LIGO doesn't detect anything, their approach will be dissected pretty heavily and if that never uncovers a mistake then I would think it would be a pretty big deal.  Just from energy considerations there has to be a method to remove energy from an accelerated mass system and GR tells us that it should be gravitational waves (we don't see energy being radiated away by any other means - electromagnetic for example).  I think not finding it, and not finding a mistake with the project, would be a big deal.

Question :What if there are no Gravity waves, no quantum gravity?

Question :No question but I live near the LIGO in louisiana and recently went on a tour. I went pretty late and so me and my girlfriend got a one on one tour of the facility. Im an undergrad in math so it was pretty interesting to see how its all coming together. I just wanted to say that the staff were super friendly and it was a really great time! thanks for doing the tours they're awesome!

Question :Kip Thorns writes a nice section about LIGO in "The Science of Interstellar." From my understanding he was heavily involved in LIGO, if so, how much? And also do you think this has any potential to give us some juicy data to work on quantum-gravity with?

Question :Omg! Physics grad student here and LIGO is my favourite experiment in physics ! How does one join the LIGO collaboration ?

 Can you say something about the ocean waves being your background ? What kind of vibrations do they produce ? How different is this likely to be from the gravitational wave signal you are expecting ?

What is the status of LISA or a LIGO in space ? 

Question :Can you give us some specs on the laser sources? Single-frequency? build them yourself, or commercial? Source power vs. power at detector?

Question :As I understand it, gravitational waves travel at the speed of light. Are there sufaces/objects/fields that would cause a gravitational wave to propogate slower, analagous to cherenekov radiation? If so, what would a "gravitational shock wave" look like?

Answer :(Not with LIGO) I could be wrong but I think the same reason that they are hard to detect is also why astronomers find them so sexy!  That reason is they react very weekly with matter and cannot be absorbed or scattered.  I think they always travel at the speed of light in a vacuum.  Because of this, they can look further back in time than they can with electromagnetic radiation at an earlier universe that was opaque to light but completely transparent to gravitational waves.  They can also look at dense astrophysical systems too!  It is all very cool.  

Question :Hello LIGO Team! Thank you very much for doing this AMA!!!  
My question is to do with the setup of your experimental system: How does it differ from the Michaelson-Morely interferometer??? I understand that this interferometer does a lot more stuff, but it is still an interferometer, isn't it?  
I am very happy to be able to ask about this, as I learned first of this experiment from Science Fiction (ok, actually, a series called 'Numbers', but we'll leave that aside.). 

Answer :Advanced LIGO is a Michelson interferometer, but it is enhanced with some additional features to increase its sensitivity:

* Each of the Michelson's arms are actually themselves separate interferometers called Fabry-Perot interferometers. These are linear cavities which enhance the signal a passing gravitational wave would make.

* The beam splitter part of the Michelson has near to it two additional mirrors which help to increase the amount of power inside the interferometer and selectively tune the interferometer's most sensitive frequency. These are called power and signal recycling mirrors.

* Also departing from a tradition, the Advanced LIGO interferometers are locked ('locking' is just a way of saying they are held on resonance) on the 'dark fringe' rather than half way up a fringe (like physics undergraduates might have done at school). This is for signal strength reasons, but it introduces a whole lot more complications.

But yes, at their heart, they are essentially giant Michelson-Morley interferometers.

Question :Hi, i have been following the developments of your research since uni but now I'm just a common man I wonder how your research will affect the common person?  What technological advances do you see trickling down from the cutting edge of interferometers to make the household product of tomorrow? Thanks

Question :What is the expected trigger rate for LIGO?

Question :I recall reading somewhere that the mirrors in LIGO are cooled to such an extent that they are among the first macroscopic objects to "behave in quantized manner" (I don't know if I'm phrasing that correctly).

If any of the team would care to expound on this, I would love a little more information, even if it's just the correction of a sensationalized or misinterpreted concept.


Question :What is your best estimate of the frequency of events that produce gravitational waves above your detection threshold?  All of the events you listed sound rather rare.  Is there an estimate of the expected waiting time before making an observation?  After what period of time can you be reasonably sure that no detections indicates that gravitational waves do not exist?

Question :Okay, I hope I can formulate my question in a way that doesn't come across as gibberish. Here goes:

If you take a 12-inch ruler and put it in the freezer, it will compress. Put it in the oven and it will expand. But either way, it will still say that it's 12 inches long, because the measuring devices (the tick marks) are part of the ruler. If you want to measure the compression and expansion, you have to use a second ruler. 

Gravitational waves, as I understand them, are waves (ie, compressions and expansions) of spacetime. 

Given that you can't put your devices *outside* of spacetime to measure it (i.e., using a second ruler isn't an option), how do you measure compressions and expansions of spacetime with devices that are themselves part of spacetime? How do you set things up so that your measuring devices aren't just part of the wave you're trying to measure, like the tick marks on the first ruler are part of the ruler?

In other words, if this is true:

>Gravity waves are believed to compress space itself as they go by. Sort of like being in the ocean, but instead of going up and down and side to side, matter would contract slightly like in a black hole. Gravity telescopes work by measuring a laser traveling a known distance. If the distance it travels is changed, that would imply a gravity wave went through the path of the laser.

If space itself is compressed, wouldn't the distance traveled *from the perspective of someone* **in** *space* be the same?

Do you use some sort of triangulation?

Or, am I wrong about what gravitational waves are? 

(I really hope I articulated that clearly).

Answer :(Not with LIGO) With light!  Theory tells us that light is less sensitive to ripples in space-time than mass is.  So a gravitational wave perturbs the path of light differently than the masses.  Since the mirrors are masses and they are reflecting light back and forth, they should see a diffraction pattern when a gravitational wave passes by!  Theory hat:  light moves on the null geodesic and masses move on mass geodesics.  

Question :How can we help further your project? 

Question :My (simplistic) impression of LIGO is two perpendicular arms of a huge interferometer. A gravitational wave will cause one arm to become slightly longer and you can count the fringes to see how much it lengthened. My first question is, why does the gravitational wave extend the optical path length of one arm, but not the wavelength of the light in the arm? It seems like the path length would increase in step with wavelength, and you would never see fringes. 

Second, how do you keep an interferometer with arms that long stable? Particularly in a state with so much seismic activity? And how do you account for diffraction over such long distances? 

Finally, what kind of laser(s) are you using?

edit: Maggie Tse, what is "quantum enhancement"?

edit: grammar

Answer :(Not with LIGO) Light is affected by ripples in space-time to a lesser degree than masses are.  So the wavelength of the light in the arm does change, but not by much and certainly less than the distortions of mass.  In theory terms, this is because light travels along the null geodesic.

Question :Will this technology be able to see past an event horizon, or will is the scope to learn more about black holes before that point?

Question :I'm curious how a varied speed of light (c) would affect the outcomes of your measurements.  I'm no professional, but it's been released now in a number of science papers that the c is inconsistent and can be slowed down by number of factors including density of matter and whether or not it's passing through a vacuum.  If it can slow down, that would suggest it can also speed up under the right conditions.  If this is the case, how would you be able to identify if the fluctuation was due to gravitational waves or just a fluctuation over space in c?

https://www.sciencenews.org/article/speed-light-not-so-constant-after-all

Answer :(Not with LIGO) I think the LIGO arms are vacuumed.

Question :LIGO seems to only measure from an x and y axis. Would a 3rd axis assist in detecting the gravity waves or is it unnecessary with the current setup?

Also does how does the location of each LIGO facility relate to each other.  Are they independent of each other or is data from both required for the detection of gravity waves?

Answer :The 3rd axis would help, but in reality would be impractical.
 We have a hard enough time doing it on two-dimensional plane, 
and you can achieve a similar result by having multiple interferometers
 distributed around the globe. 
Data from both sites is searched for coincident detections. (NK)

Question :Could experimental results from LIGO provide insight on the recent study published by UGA which states "the slowing of time predicted by Albert Einstein can provide an alternate explanation of dark energy"?
"Implication of an Absolute Simultaneity Theory for Cosmology and Universe Acceleration," was published Dec. 23 in the journal PLOS ONE
reddit: http://redd.it/2rehll


Question :How did you come up with this type of detector?

Answer :As far as I know, the first person to build a Michelson interferometer for gravitational wave detection was [Robert Forward](http://journals.aps.org/prd/pdf/10.1103/PhysRevD.17.379) (I hope that link is accessible to everyone, as it describes what he built!). He built it at Hughes Laboratory in the early seventies, although from what I understand by reading Harry Collins's book, Gravity's Shadow, the idea was talked about, in the US, the Soviet Union, and elsewhere by several scientists of the era.

Forward was quite an inventive fellow -- he also published ways that people could travel to other stars on solar sails with an extra push from laser or microwave beams. It took some years before further prototypes, such as by Ronald Drever of Glasgow/Caltech, began development. These, in turn, led to LIGO.

It's a natural idea! Michelson interferometers measure the difference between two orthogonal pathlengths, which is just what gravitational waves change.
-GM

Question :Current theory says that short gamma ray bursts are due to the coalescence of two neutron stars, which LIGO is designed to detect. Given that there haven't yet been detections of short GRBs within advanced LIGOs detection range, do you think LIGO is likely to detect a source like this within the next decade?

Question :What happens fi you do not find gravitational waves of any kind in your device?  What does that mean for the current theories?

Question :The model for gravitational wave observation is through a change in distance between otherwise fixed objects.  I'm curious if anyone has explored the relative sensitivities of gravitational wave observations through other effects.  Space twisting might cause cause a rotation between fixed objects for example.  This might be easier or more difficult to detect in practice - I just don't know.  

Question :Hi, thanks for this. Layman's question: since we are constantly under the effects of gravity from the sun, the moon, our galaxy's black hole etc, would the gravity waves be pretty constant (and discernible as soon as you start the experiment), or is there some phenomenon that causes some type of spike or irregular distortion that is more rare that you will be looking for?

Question :How fast do gravitational waves move ? Is it possible to set up LIGO in space to catch gravitational waves early ?

Question :Any thoughts on LIGO detecting Christodoulou memory waves or is that something that would require a space-based detector, such as LISA?

Question :Has LIGO Hanford been able to recover from losing one of its key Operators/LSOs a year and a half ago? Will it ever?

Question :What is your opinion of [this article](http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.4779), which claims that even Advanced LIGO is simply not sensitive enough to detect gravitational waves at any frequency?

Question :Probably not what you're looking for, but as someone with only basic scientific literacy who has been reading up on physics a bit, standard model vs. gen. relativity etc, I cannot get my head around this...I suspect the answer may be impossible to give but...

What is gravity?

Do we actually know yet what causes it, how it works etc.?
Also, is there any possibility in generating our own gravity, artificailly (true gravity, not just centripetal force), as this may be very important for space travel....??

Lastly, is there any connection between weak forces, eletromagnetism and gravity?

Question :What elementary particle is the Graviton the gauge boson of please? How do you intend to measure a passing gravitational wave?

Question :Is the universe still expanding? Will it get to a point and then collapse? 

Question :How do I get a job with you guys? I'm working on a mechanical engineering degree with a minor in physics. What else you you like to see as I am a couple years from graduating?

Question :Hey, LIGO! Thanks for doing this AMA. Reading about LIGO is actually what made me interested in physics in the first place! Sorry if this is a silly question, but what about Advanced LIGO makes it more likely to detect gravitational waves than ELIGO? Given how rare things like supernovas are, are there any other things that involve big gravitational disturbances that LIGO can detect? Also, I heard that there was a project called LISA, which would involve satellites in space with several hundred million kilometers of separation. I know this is theoretical, but how would you ensure that the satellites remain stationary relative to each other? Are there any plans to set that up now? And how would relativity affect the readings from the satellites?  
Also, why is the presence of gravity not accounted for in the standard model? Is it because of its comparitive weakness relative to other forces? Is there a theoretical concept of repulsive "antigravity" like electromagnetic repulsion? I read once that it may be "rolled up" in higher dimensions. Am I misunderstanding, and if LIGO obtains a positive result, what does that mean for what I just said?  
Also, I was wondering. So LIGO detects distortions in space as they propagate through spacetime. If a star goes supernova, does that gravity wave come as a single wave, like for EM radiation, or does it become a permanent shift in spacetime as a result of the change in a gravity source?  
    
Once again, thanks for doing this AMA and thanks for answering my silly questions.

Question :I recall being told that measuring the strength of the stochastic gravitational-wave background could help us determine the topology of the universe. Could you elaborate on that, and/or tell me why I'm wrong?

Question :Will your experiment be able to detect, directly, primordial gravitational waves from the Big Bang? Or is that really in the domain of experiments such as Planck and BICEP2?

Question :I am a current Mathematics & Physics student at University.

**What advice would you give to the younger you, when you were an undergraduate student?
What is the biggest piece of advice that you would give to every aspiring student of Physics?**

This question is open to everyone, but I guess the more the better!

Question :Hey LIGO! I remember writing an astronomy assignment about you guys last year. Very cool stuff. I was wondering how, once GWs are finally detected, how they will be used to provide information? Do certain properties of GWs give you guys indications of its origins?

Question :If you were going to advise someone making a theatrical application, using CGI to illustrate what these things you're studying might look like, who would you choose to narrate it?

Also what style would you prefer it to be in? I've always felt cheated that no one makes Fantasia-styled presentations of the weird and terrifying events scientist purpose are the sources of EM emission events. I would love to see a ten minute scene of a supermassive black hole going active, and a time lapse of the projected effects to a dense, gas-laden galaxy getting blasted from the inside.

Soo....your thoughts?

Question :I'm not sure if this has been answered, but how do you "aim" the sensor, how do you decide what the source of a gravitational effect is

Question :LIGO's measurements are incredibly precise, what are the strangest things your team has had to account for in order to reduce noise in the measurement?  E.g. tidal forces caused by the orbit of the moon?

Question :I live in Richland, WA (just south of Hanford for those not familiar).  Are there tours of the LIGO observatory open to the public?  

Question :After reading about the design of LIGO, I have to ask: what would cause a false positive result that incorrectly confirms the existence (or misreads the strength, for that matter) of gravity waves? 

Question :Could your work offer any answers regarding the existence of an infinite singularity?

Question :What could the results of your work teach us about fundamental physics?  How is your work important beyond the study of the specific events you're investigating?  

Question :How will your team distinguish the source of any fluctuations you detect?  It would seem that isolating gravity from all other sources is an astronomical task in itself, let alone measuring its direction/point of origin.  


Question :Is the entire apparatus at each of the GW detector facilities housed in a single vacuum chamber?

Question :Do any of you think we are really starting to stretch the use of the word 'observation' when experiments are mediated by so much technology?

Question :I'm trying to wrap my head around local spacetime warping.  If a gravitational wave alters the spacetime of the detector, won't that wave alter the path of the light as well, such that no change is detected?

Question :Do gravity waves vary at all?  Like shades of light?

Is there a medium they travel slower in?

Does anything other than mass affect gravity waves?

Question :Slightly off topic question for /u/kaistaats: 
How is UCT? I've done my undergrad in astrophysics in California, but I'm interested in moving back to SA, my country of origin, next year to do my Msc in Astophysics. What's the physics community like there? Job prospects? 

Question :Well if gravity affect electromagnetism, then why we can't use the opposite dependece-to affect gravity with electromagnetism? 

Question :Dr. Yoshida is awesome. Wonderful professor.

Question :How do you eliminate noise (heat expansion, vibration, etc) and what kind noise are you dealing with. 

Question :So why do you think you haven't detected gravity waves yet?

Question :Since you all are working on a project that is working to verify a part of GR how would you respond to the worry of some that the direction Physics is heading in is that of "armchair physics" rather than direct observational evidence? My personal opinion is that there is still a ton left to do. The article below mentions that with SUSY coming under heavy fire significant problems exist that will need to be worked out...

I'm referring to this recent article on NPR:
http://www.npr.org/blogs/13.7/2015/01/27/381809832/the-most-dangerous-ideas-in-science

P.S. you all are doing awesome work! Super excited to read your results. Thanks for pushing human knowledge that little (big) bit farther! :)

Question :There are a myriad of reasons that gravitational waves are produced, including the effects of multiverse gravitational phasing. Do you realize that your work may also have the potential to confirm the existence of the multiverse?

Question :So.. I guess you are measuring changes in the length of your 4km run right? as the waves pass through the earth they very slightly squeeze and then unsqueeze us. So you send a laser down then back again and recombine the beams, watch the interference pattern to determine changes in path length.

I remember some proposed thing like this when I was doing my A-Levels ('98), the idea was to construct a 6km sided triangle in space with laser interferometers constantly measuring the length of each side.

The issue they had was that thermal expansion alone would change the size of this triangle by like 20 meters or more and they were looking for a change in size about a quarter the width of an atom.

I was just wondering how you were going to overcome issues like that. I suppose as you're on earth you could keep the temperature fixed. But such a fine measurement is required, I would have thought damn near anything could scupper your readings.

Question :too much information, too many answers... you need a PRM, plus a marketing team and an offical "layman" speaker!.

Question :This AMA is above my head and I love you for that. Keep up the hard work! 

Question :If the Kessel run is an 18-parsec route past the Maw cluster of black holes, which distort space and time, is it possible that the distance of the run can be shortened by flying closer to the cluster, taking advantage of the distortion? Or does the distortion of a black hole only make routes near it longer?

Question :I mistakenly read your title as deflect gravition not detect. So I'm going with that,  in the future do you think we will be able to manipulate gravity amd how so? 

Question :What would it mean if you detected no gravitational waves at all?

Question :What do you think your research will discover about black holes?

Question :What is the best possible outcome from this project in your oppinon?  

What is the worst?

Question :1. What was the biggest challenge while building LIGO (maybe apart from securing money)?

2. What would happen if I put my hand into the laser? Would it cut my hand, just like in the movies, or would I not even feel anything? I know that some guy put his head into a cyclotron and basically nothing happened apart from swelling

Question :If we don't know what gravitational waves are exactly, how can you know what type of device is needed in order to detect them?

Answer :We do know what they are. What we don't know is whether they exist.

Question :Hey LIGO! Thanks for the AMA!  What are the leading theories that might explain the transmission of gravity and gravitational waves? If gravitons are particles, how would they transmit an attractive force? 

Question :Gravitational waves? As far as im concered, gravity is just a force. Could someone explain?

Answer :In all our predictions and observations so far, the effect of gravity travels at the speed of light. Thus, like with anything else constrained to a speed limit, any source switching between "on off" states will produce ripples of that thing, just like if you repeatedly poke a finger into still water it will create distinct "waves" in the water traveling outward. In the context of gravity, an "on off" source would be two high mass objects (stars, neutron stars, black holes) orbiting or merging with one another. Since gravity is really nothing more than compression of  space itself, a gravity wave is a traveling compression, somewhat like an oscillating sound wave or a shockwave.

Question :Hello!

So if all goes well, we will have a new way to view the universe. That is *awesome*. 

My question is about the general population. Most of us are not expert cosmologists or even amateur scientists in the traditional sense. Me personally, I'd love to learn more about binary black holes, supernovae, and even *lasers*. But, if the results from this experiment can only be understood by that of someone with years of education under their belt, I'm afraid I will not get to fully appreciate your experiment.

**My question:** So, with all this cool new data, is there any chance there will be a rendering of what the data from the experiment shows us, specifically for those ill-informed on the special techniques you all will be using to analyze the data? I'm hopeful for a picture, animation, rendering, etc.

Thanks for doing this AMA! I hope your experiment reveals you more than you ever hoped for. 



Question :I just want to thank y'all for the placement of the LIGO in Livingston.  I killed my first deer in 2013 sitting in a stand about 1-200 yards off the LIGO on the power line.

Question :What important experiments are planned for this apparatus? What practial benefits (if any) do you foresee arising from your work? 

What questions concerning cosmology do you think it can settle?  Dark energy? Dark matter? What contributions can you foresee towards grand unification, particularly between general relativity and the standard model, or perhaps opening up a new perspective we hadn't noticed before?

Yeah, I've got a lot of questions. My physics teacher taught me always to ask a lot of questions ;)





Question :Hello. Could your research lead to artificial gravity for space travel? If not, how far off do you suspect it will be until we have harnessed gravity?

Question :Alright I have a total pleb understanding of this but I still wonder if your research could answer this question. Feel free to correct me where I'm wrong. 
So, gravitational waves travel at the same speed as light. And dark matter affects gravity but not light. Then would the light from the sun travel quicker, or maybe differently, through dark matter than the gravitational waves of the sun?

Answer :Dark matter is stuff that has mass but doesn't interact through the electric field. It does have mass, so it curves spacetime.

Light travels through spacetime, so it will curve in the presence of dark matter. It doesn't interact directly, because light only has effects on things that interact with the electric field. 

Dark matter does not interact with the electric field. Photons interact only through the electric field. So the don't interact. EXCEPT! Dark matter has mass, so it curves spacetime that the electric field occupies. So light bends around dark matter because it is heavy, not because it affects the electric field.

Question :1. How did you secure the equipment so that there is no interference coming from other human activities / Earth itself?

2. What would happen if a "god particle" would hit an atom in my hand. Would I feel it? (e.g. would it activate so many atoms near the place it hit another atom, that my nerve endings would register it)

3. Can "time" be understood as the rate the universe expands? Time seems to be connected with gravity and expansion of matter slows down near heavy objects... just like time.

Answer :Each optic has MULTIPLE systems to help dampen certain predetermined bandwiths of frequencies. Whether they be human activities, ocean waves, or someone driving in the parking lot. 

Question :Do gravitational ways ripple through other dimensions?

Question :What are your thoughts on the recent bicep2 data being galactic dust? Do you feel the research team was irresponsible for releasing, what they thought, was evidence for gravity waves so soon? 

Question :Is it possible that the larger universe is more massive than void?

I got a notion that if, beyond our view, there were some number of super massive and similarly charged objects, or zones, that the energy from the interaction of gravity and the repulsive force in the interstitial space, made void by the gravity, could spontaneously convert to matter...bang?

Answer :Really, because that would explain the acceleration of expansion with gravity, instead of inventing a *dark force*, because everything is falling away from the "big bang," not exploding.


Question :Is it possible that the universe is
 completely filled with "particles" much smaller than photons and have a weak force interaction with all matter that has mass? This would allow fluid dynamics to mimic reaction at a macro level just like gravity is created at the micro level. My guess is that these "particles" are either moving millions of times faster than light or the univ.erse is just a "balloon" filled with them. I even think that they are all in "communication " allowing for spooky action at a distance. Let me know your thoughts or blow my idea out of the water.

Question :[removed]

Question :I read it as the Lego Experiment, and was super bummed out.  Sorry guys :P

For you guys and gals, what was the most challenging part of building aLIGO? 

What made you guys decide to build LIGO instead of trying to use an Observatory that already existed, for instance? 

Finally, what's the most interesting phenomena you think you *may* have a good chance of understanding *within* the next few years, due to your work with aLIGO? (for all intensive purposes, few can be anywhere from 3-5 years from now)

Question :IIRC, LIGO has been around for quite some time. Have you detected anything yet? If not, why not?

Question :How much is Africa contributing to this research?

Question :How do gravitational waves interact with matter?

Answer :They don't, really - not in the way you would expect light or radio waves to interact with matter. They pass through everything, stretching the space they are in slightly in the process. 

-JS /PhD student, high power laser development, Hannover/Germany

Question :What were your first thoughts when you realized you had made such a huge discovery? 

Answer :We did not believe it.  It was weeks before we believed it.  At first we all thought that it was an injected signal of some sort.  But once we realized that it was not we started getting pretty excited.  The biggest problem was just that it seemed too perfect.  With a signal-to-noise ratio of ~24 it was crystal clear in the data and it had the perfect "chirp" frequency pattern.  It looked inauthentic at first.  We were expecting to barely detect something if we did, as opposed to having a large, blatant signal.

-VR PhD Student U of Oregon, LIGO WA Site

Question :How are gravitational waves affected by inflation?

Answer :This is my favourite question! 

1. The GWs from Inflation [for most of the Inflationary models!] are at very low frequencies. So, if you are talking about interference of those with GWs from compact objects (such as BHs, NSs) - which is possible, we may see some modulation [from interference] in frequency as well as amplitude domain. However, the predicted GWs from Inflation are at very very low amplitudes as well (besides the low frequency!), roughly in the 1.0e-30 - 1.0e-27 range. This makes them really hard to separate by de-modulation, in frequency as well as amplitude.

2. If you are wondering about emission of GWs from Inflation, we are not currently able to detect those because of their extremely small amplitudes. Also, at low frequencies of primordial GWs (from Inflation), Seismic noise in ground-based detectors is overwhelming. We will have to wait for eLISA to sort out the primordial GWs. However, it is possible to see their effect on CMB (Cosmic Microwave Background) photons' polarisations, which is what BICEP2 was trying to accomplish.

3. One could argue if there are Inflationary models which predict louder Primordial GWs. A: We haven't see any such stochastic background, if it is loud enough. B: Models predicting loud GW emissions are currently ruled out by Planck mission results [CMB].

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :If a gravitational wave was powerful enough, would a human be able to feel/experience it going through them?

Answer :Myself and one of my supervisors had a conversation about this a few weeks ago. We did some calculations which suggest that if you were in a space-ship close to the merging black holes you would feel a force which was pretty comparable to the force you feel by standing next to a loudspeaker at a music concert. You'd feel a vibration travelling through your body, but we were pretty confident it wouldn't hurt you! 

-- DW (I work on burst [transient events] searches, and I'm at the University of Glasgow, Scotland)

Question :Does the confirmation of these exceedingly—difficult-to-detect gravitational waves force any re-calculations of existing physics ‘canon’?

Answer :Not yet!  Everything about this first detection falls in line with our expectations from what we know about physics.  The rate at which binary black holes form in nature and the masses of the binary black holes are consistent with theoretical predictions (mostly because those predictions were *very* broad).  And the signal itself matches what we expect from general relativity to as-well-as-we-can-measure for this event.  We will be watching future events very careful for any departures from theory.  That is when the *real* fun begins.  --TBL

Question :First of all congratulations on the result. My university and some of my professors are part of the VIRGO collaboration and I've even visited VIRGO recently, so this was even more exciting.  
My question: how is it even conceivable to measure such a small distance? That seriously blows my mind. I know that interferometers are really accurate, but we are talking about fractions of the radius of a proton here! How is that small change amplified so much to be measurable?

Answer :An interferometer measures the length change relative to the wavelength of the light - so already we're at 10^-7 m. Now we're looking at detecting the fringe shift at the output of the interferometer, which we can detect to a sensitivity of 10^-9 at a power of 1mW (we're operating at a dark port configuration, which means hardly any power leaves the interferometer - there is a buildup of a few hundred kW in the arms!). By sending the signal back into the interferometer to let it build up as well, we can increase that sensitivity to 10^-13, which already enables us to detect a length change of 10^-20 m. However, the arms are several kilometers long, and we're detecting the length change relative to the entire arm - this puts us at our design sensitivity of up to 10^-23. 

-Justus S /PhD student, high power laser development, Hannover/Germany

Question :Just pointing out that even though we don't have spokespeople around to reply on this account, we have many LIGO members answering from LIGO_WA, LIGO_LA, EGO_VIRGO, LIGO_Instrumentation, and LIGO_Astrophysics!

Answer :I was hired on to the cleaning crew of the beam tube at the facility in Livingston, Louisiana. The job was given to me through a work contractor called Savard, and it was truly an honor to be apart of that operation. I absolutely LOVED going to work every day, learning something new all the time, meeting incredible people, and touring the facility. Ray Weiss even gave me his autograph on my last day of work. Working for LIGO was honestly the greatest job I have ever had and I will never forget my time there.
Anyways, my question is are y'all planning on cleaning the beam tube again? :]

Question :How do you feel about your career now as compared to before the discovery? Do you feel more recognized, more "useful" by being part of what seems to be a new frontier of astronomy? I am not indicating that one should feel bad if they do not make a huge discovery, but it must have some impact.

Answer :A couple of weeks ago I was having lunch with some members of my department. We were discussing the sometimes-awkward conversations you have on e.g. airplanes when a stranger asks “so what do you do for a living?” The secret, as it turns out, is to just say “astronomy” — because it’s apparently a little less intimidating than “I’m an astrophysicist that studies gravitational waves.” My colleague joked, “but to call yourself an astronomer, you have to have detected something!"

Suffice to say, I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t excited about being able to call myself a “gravitational wave astronomer” now.

But beyond that, we’ve been confident in the value of gravitational wave science for a very long time. And while the recognition certainly lends us credibility in the public eye, I definitely agree that it doesn’t take away from other “frontier sciences.” In the end, this is the beginning of a whole new world of observational science and it’s exciting to be a part of it!

Buuuut… somehow I can’t help but think I might be a little more employable now! :)

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation and grammar]

Question :How big is Python in the scientific community? I noticed that you used it in your paper.

Answer :I can't speak for the data-analysis and astrophysics side of the LSC, but in the control room Python is used to automate the vast majority of the instrument. There are many control loops that must be used to keep the LIGO instruments operating at their optimal sensitivity. However, they can't just all be switched on at once! There is a complicated procedure for switching on all of these loops in the right order with the right feedback gains and so on, and this procedure (as well as many others) are controlled by a software infrastructure written in Python.

PJF, research faculty, interferometric sensing and control *Edited initials to distinguish from other PFs

Question :Thanks everybody so much for asking questions! You can't imagine how much fun we are having talking to all of you about our research. We're all in need of a break/some sleep right now (it's 1am in Germany), so we'll leave you for a bit. But we'll be back throughout the weekend, so please continue asking questions - this is such a privilege! See you guys later!


Justus S - PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Answer :This has been a great AMA - thanks for all the replies!

Question :This is one of the best AMAs I've ever seen. So many questions are being answered and I am learning a lot. How does it make you feel, to see so much interest in your field and discovery? 

Answer :It's really amazing to see how much our discovery is being discussed on social media and in the news and how interested people are! As physicists, we are used to people's eyes glazing over when we try to tell them about what we do, so, it's nice that everyone is so excited now!

JC and MW, graduate students LSU and LLO

Question :Can this observation be considered as a 5 sigma discovery of an actual black hole with an event horizon?


Answer :The 5 sigma statement is about how unlikely it would be for something this significant to be made by noise from the detector. In this case, the event was much louder than anything we can measure, so the 5.1 sigma is actually a bound. The signal itself was later analyzed and found to be very consistent with what you would predict from general relativity. 

-Nitz, modeled searches for compact binary coalescences, Hannover, Germany

Question :During the press conference yesterday,  it was stated that to detect gravitational waves, it requires a strain sensitivity of about 10^-21. For the 4km long arms of LIGO, this is about equal to a sensitivity of 10^-18 meters, which is much smaller than the radius of an atom. How did you take into acccount the noise of thermal fluctuations of the atoms of the mirror surfaces? If the laser bounces off the mirror, but the surface atoms are moving, how do you differentiate that noise from a gravitational wave?

Answer :The trick is to have your laser beam illuminate ~10^24 atoms on the surface of the mirror. The coherent reflection is an average over 10^24 atoms, so the fluctuations are down by 1/sqrt(that) = 10^-12 of the size of an atom. Averaging saves the day! - AlanW

Question :How bad was your hangover this morning? 

Answer :I was surprisingly fine actually, but there was a lot of celebration here in Hannover! I think some people only left after the first people had arrived back at work again. I can't imagine what it was like at the detectors themselves...

-JS /PhD student, high power laser development, Hannover/Germany

Question :Can you give a Year 10 science student a basic rundown of this what this discovery entails?

Answer :Sure!  We observed the collision of two black holes -- each one about 30 times heavier than the Sun -- a little more than one billion light years away.  That in itself is amazing.  The revolutionary thing is *how* we observed them, using the tiny disturbances in gravity that collision caused instead of light.  For all of human history our only tool for learning about the cosmos was light.   We now have a brand new way of observing the Universe and many more discoveries are waiting for us. --TBL


Question :So, if i'm understanding this correctly.. you had no idea in advance that these black holes existed UNTIL you picked up the signal?  Correct?  

If that's true how did you:

1.) Determine they were black holes and not something else?

2.) Can you explain how you triangulate the relative location of these masses with only two detectors?  Wouldn't you need 3?

3.) If you caught this event from 1.3 billion light years away, wouldn't you expect to be catching signals ALL the time?  Every day?  Every hour?  Every minute?

Thanks in advance!! Congratulations!!

Answer :1) We use Einstein's equation and supercomputers to calculate what the wave from a black-hole merger would look like, and the observed waveform matches exactly. Besides, just by looking at the frequency of the wave you can tell that the objects must have been VERY compact, so much so that they can only be black holes.

2) We use frequency and amplitude information, as well as time of arrival at both detectors, to restrict the position of the source to a somewhat broad area in the sky (you can see the sky-map in the "Sky location" tab here https://losc.ligo.org/events/GW150914/); however, you are right that more detectors are needed to better pinpoint the location of a source.

3) GWs are pass through Earth constantly, but that doesn't mean we can detect all of them. How many signals we see has to do both with how sensitive our detectors are and how often events that can cause waves strong enough happen; because we observed one of these events in 18 days of observation, we can tell that there are between 2 and 400 of these events per year per gigaparsec cubed events like this in the space around us.

Thank you for your interest!

-- MI, Caltech

Question :Dear Reddit-ers,

I have tried to answer as many questions as I can by myself during the past 4-5 hours. I now hand over the reigns of this AMA to my colleagues. You'll be joined by Justus Schmidt and Brian O'Reilly [I presume] along with many others very soon! Stay tuned and keep asking! I apologise to all those who I couldn't answer. I wish I had a pair of extra arms or a set of extra fingers! Signing off from Hannover, Germany. See you folks later!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :The mass of each black hole was approximately 30 solar masses. This is an unusually large size compared the the largest stellar black hole I know about M33 X-7 at around 16 solar masses. If accurate does this tell us something new about stellar black holes and how big they can be formed?

Also, was the spin of the secondary black hole constrained enough to estimate the recoil/kick from the merger? Could this merger have ejected the final black hole from its galaxy?

Answer :The black holes that made up the detection are indeed the most massive stellar mass black holes observed.  This tells us that the metallicity of the stars that formed the black holes must have been much less than the solar metallicity.  See http://www.ligo.org/science/Publication-GW150914Astro/index.php for more details.  

The part of the spin that tells us about black hole kicks was not well constrained so we don't know for this event, but we will be looking carefully at future detections.  --TBL


Question :First of all, congratulations, and thank you for this amazing accomplishment.

According to GR, gravitational waves distort space-time itself rather than moving through it, am I correct?

What would be experimental difference between these two interpretations, namely, GW distorting space-time vs. moving through it displacing masses on its course?

Am I correct in expect red/blue-shifts in electromagnectic radiation due to the passing GW? Does it have a measurable effect on the LIGO laser beam? I mean, in addition to the displacement of the mirrors?

Answer :Gravitational waves move through spacetime along the direction they are propagating, and distort space time in the directions *transverse* to that propagation.  So, if the gravitational wave is moving through your screen it would distort the height and width of the screen, but not the thickness.

Gravitational waves cause distortions in spacetime which in turn would change the wavelength of light, but these are incredibly small distortions which are not noticeable (or else we would use that to detect them!)

The changes to the wavelength of the LIGO laser beam are completely dwarfed by the difference in time it takes for the laser light to travel down one arm of the detector and back, compared to the other arm. --TBL

Question :Now that we have confirmed Einstein's long-time hypothesis, are there any direct applications of this discovery? What I mean to ask is, though there is no disputing this is an amazing scientific discovery, can this knowledge be used practically in a way that even non-scientific minds can grasp?

Answer :Not directly, no. But that isn't always the point of this kind of research.. In order to make this discovery, a whole bunch of technology has been developed for this! Really precise optics that were used here have a whole bunch of industrial plants. The sensing equipment that's placed all around the detectors have given a really great insight into how really unrelated phenomena can be linked. Some of the codes developed could be used in a really wide range of other places, now that big data management has become key in so many industries.

But best of all, we now have a really practical way to listen to the universe! It's opened a new window into the universe to do science, and who knows what can come from that!

The direct applications of GR are far off, but the indirect boons from science are always a win.
BP - Glasgow University and LHO Fellow

Question :Do gravitational waves experience normal wave effects such as reflection, refraction, and diffraction? If so, are these effects likely to be large enough to be detectable with aLIGO?

Answer :It is hard to imagine the right kind of lens for GWs, since they go through pretty much everything.  I guess we could hope for gravitational lensing of GWs... that would be fun.  [ME, MIT Prof.]

Question :Up until this point it seems black holes were "observed" indirectly.  By mathematical models, through observing gravitational lensing, or the ABSENCE of data.  One could argue that black holes still weren't proven, (though we assumed they did, just as we assumed gravitational waves existed)

So can you confirm, this is the first time in history that we have DIRECTLY measured a black hole?  

Answer :Yes.

While electromagnetic emission from a black hole has been theorised (Hawking radiation) it's far too faint for us to have ever seen. GW150914 was the first time we had ever seen an emission from a black hole: in this case it was the emission from two black holes merging into one. 

Before that we'd only ever been able to observe the effects of a black hole on other things, like objects orbiting them, or light travelling past them.

-- DW (Burst [unmodelled transients] analysis, at the University of Glasgow, Scotland)

Question :This is the dawn of a new branch of astronomical science: gravitational astronomy. What do you see as the scientific possibilities for observations using this approach?

Answer :As you say, it's gonna be a whole new branch of astronomy, so there are MANY possibilites. Right now we are mostly hoping for more binary systems - either more binary black holes, or maybe double neutron stars, or one neutron star plus one black hole. But we are also searching for single rapidly spinning neutron stars that would give us a wholly different signal - continuous over the whole observation span, but even weaker. And for signals from supernovae: exploding massive stars. Or maybe even the very elusive signals from the early universe - right after the big bang - if we get really lucky.

And of course, any new observation will not only tell us something about that individual astronomical source - but also further allow us to test Einstein's generaly relativity to ever higher precision and under new circumstances.

If you're ok with some technical lingo, there's also a great, free article about some of our science goals for the future goals that went online as a "Living Review" this week: http://relativity.livingreviews.org/Articles/lrr-2016-1/

DK (data analyst)

Question :I'm assuming gravitational waves are massless since they travel at c...How can 3 solar masses of energy get converted into something that has no mass?

Answer :Yes, gravitational waves are massless.
Einstein's equation E = mc^2 states that mass is basically a form of energy. So, by "three solar masses of energy", we mean that the equivalent of that amount of energy was stored in these waves.
SU -  Student at Syracuse

Question :Do gravitational waves propagate at the speed of light? Did the event being measured actually occur 1 billion years ago?

Answer :So, we're pretty sure that they do travel at the speed of light (we detected the wave passing through our observatory in Washington, USA 7 milli-seconds after it passed through our observatory in Louisiana. We can work backwards to calculate its speed, which suggests that they travelled at the speed of light.

We also worked out that the event happened over 1 billion light years away, which means it took a billion years to reach us at that speed.

--DW (I work in burst [transient events] data analysis at the University of Glasgow, Scotland)

Question :This may be a stupid question, but I was wondering what would happen to the accretion disk of both or either black holes during their merger.  Would this disk be consumed entirely, would the disk still exist with less mass, or in the case of these two particular black holes would you expect to see an excretion disk?

Answer :There's not been much work (that I know of) modeling such things. They can't each have their own accretion disk, because they're too close to each other, and the disks would get disrupted by the other black hole's gravity. I think it's even unlikely for black holes to have a common accretion disk, but maybe there's some matter further out. When the black holes merge, they lose mass, and so my guess would be that the disk would disperse outwards, rather than accreting. I'm sure this is going to be a topic with a lot of discussion now that we've made our announcement!

-- AL, postdoc, detector characterization (and armchair astrophysicist), AEI Hannover

Question :Here I am, signing off from Germany where it is well past midnight! Our colleagues from US [and some night-owls from Europe] will continue to answer your questions! Keep the questions coming and we will keep answering them [throughout this weekend!!!]; I will be back tomorrow morning to answer more. Thank you all for making this AMA a success. #LIGO #EinsteinWasRight

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I just read an article about the contribution from RIT (Rochester Institute of Technology), can you explain what it is they have done to aid in the process that lead to the discovery?

Answer :The RIT team is one of several groups (I'm in a different one) that use computers to simulate sources of gravitational waves. We both ran the same simulation of two colliding black holes, and the simulated gravitational waves agreed very well with each other and what LIGO saw. That gives us confidence that the waves really came from two merging black holes, as Einstein predicted. -GL, assistant professor, Fullerton, CA

Edit: links to pages describing the RIT work and the work I was a part of, if you'd like to learn more:

http://ccrg.rit.edu/GW150914
http://black-holes.org/gw150914


Question :Hello!
How external vibrations, or differences on Earth gravity does not affect the lasers?

Answer :In fact, they do. Ground vibrations affect the mirrors that reflect the laser. We can "see" in our data earthquakes happening everywhere in the world. To mitigate the effect, we have a complex suspension, comprised of several stages. The mirrors, inside the vacuum system, hang from multiple pendula, than are mounted on tables that have active and passive isolation from ground vibrations. Also, these tables are attached to ground via a further hydraulic system that provides further isolation and allows for compensating effects that we can predict, like the tidal effects from the moon.
Variations in Earth's gravity are somewhat more tricky. They affect our instrument the same way gravitational waves do, so it is very difficult to separate them from the signal we want to see. Fortunately, they are only strong at low frequencies (on Earth, it is hard to come by big masses that move around significantly many times per second). So, as long as we look at signals that vary at about 10 Hz or more, they are too small for us to detect. As we push to observe at lower frequencies, however, they are expected to quickly become a problem. This is one of the reason why people are designing space mission to detect lower frequency gravitational waves.

GC, assistant scientist

Question :What do you guys think of efforts such as Einstein@home? Does that kind of search for gravitational waves make sense to you? Does it help in any way?

Answer :Einstein@Home actually help us analyse our data! They are based right here in Hannover, and the algorithms used are written by our data analysts. 

Justus S, PhD student developing high power lasers, Hannover, Germany

Question :Thank you for doing this AMA and all the contributions you've made to science! A couple of Physics majors at UW Madison are wondering if there were any times when you (as a team) were frustrated with the results (or lack thereof) of your experiments before they yielded anything cool? Similarly, what keeps you going through such a long project?
Thanks again!

Answer :Hello! I've been in the LSC for about four years but I have talked to a few of the big cheeses in the community on this matter. I think that the thing that kept everyone going was that we knew what the potential scientific payoff could be if we managed to build detectors sensitive enough. Knowing that for every little improvement in sensitivity we "hear" an even bigger chunk of the universe provided the necessary motivation for most people. And big projects like this involve many interesting mini-projects, where we can test out new ideas and publish some cool results, which helps to keep everyone going. --SL, PhD student working on interferometry in Glasgow

Question :Would you be able to get a better "gravitational telescope" by using, say, a gigantic tetrahedron-shaped array of lasers? Does your team have a notion of a best possible array?

Answer :LIGO has two arms at right angles. A detector with more arms would improve sensitivity to different polarizations of gravitational waves, to better pinpoint sources on the sky, and test relativity in new ways.

Two current mainstream proposals would use a triangle: the LISA/eLISA space detector www.lisamission.org and the next-generation ground-based Einstein Telescope http://www.et-gw.eu/

A Tetrahedron (4 corners) would be one step up from that, or even an octahedron (6 corners) - that gives you many new possibilities, but also gets increasingly difficult. SciFi at the moment, maybe reality in a few decades...?

DK (data analyst)

Question :1) How long did you search for the waves until their confirmation? It stretches to two questions:

a) When did the project that led to detection of the waves began?

b) Do the scientists have weekends, or do they work every day? How long do they usually work a day?

2) How many people were involved in discovery in total?

3) I was totally unprepared for this AMA, so if I got some more questions, should I write them as another comment, or as answer to one of your comments?

Answer :I'll try to answer all of these quickly!

1a) "Initial" LIGO ran for eight years, from 2002 to 2010, as a proof of concept for the detector setup. Then we upgraded it and turned it back on in Fall 2015! Our first observing run ran from September through January of this year. But the LIGO itself project started much earlier, in the 1990s. And efforts to detect GWs have been on people's minds since the 1960s! (And of course it all leads back to Einstein 100 years ago).

1b) Different scientists work different schedules! (I myself, take weekends unless there's a deadline coming up!) But most of us are always thinking about science at least a *little*. 

2) There are around 1000 people currently in the collaboration, and hundreds more that have been involved since its inception almost 30 years ago.

3) Probably another comment. There are a lot of us helping out with answers, and we want to make sure we see it!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: dates!]

Question :What are some misconceptions that have been proliferating in the wake of your announcement that you'd like to dispel?

Answer :That these are are not gravity waves! A gravity wave is a wave through fluids, such as an atmosphere, or an accretion disk around a large object. This is a very different phenomenon from gravitational waves!

BP - IGR and LHO Fellow

Question :As already answered in another thread below, the gravitational waves do not interact with matter. However, consider two charges placed at some distance with each other. Suppose very powerful g-waves pass through them, the distance between charges changes and they oscillate. Does this result in emission of EM waves? If so, the energy of EM waves came from g-waves, right? Does it mean g-waves lose energy this way? Also isn't it same as interacting with matter?

Answer :So gravitational waves do interact, just very weakly. The first attempts at detection used cryogenically cooled bars of aluminum. The idea was that a GW would make them ring at a certain frequency. LIGO's test masses are essentially in free fall and free to move.

Your pair of charges will move a little. But lets say they are separated by 1 nanometer. A wave such as LIGO detected will change this distance by about a picometer. This is a very tiny effect. Try using the numbers in Coulomb's law for a separation of 1 nm or 1nm +/- 1pm. (BO'R)

Question :The signals for gravitational waves were detected last September, but they were just announced. What was LIGO doing during the time in between?
BTW Congratulations this is worthy of a Nobel Prize!!!

Answer :We were being very very sure that the signal we detected was in fact a GW from a pair of black holes.  Very, very very sure. [ME, MIT Prof]

Question :What role does the Higgs Mechanism play, if any, in gravitational waves?

Answer :The Higgs mechanism is very quantum mechanical, whereas GW's are (so far) a purely classical, non-QM phenomenon. However, as a form of energy, the Higgs (and all other particles, mass, energy) contributes to gravity. But... quantum gravity is poorly understood and at the forefront of current research, so we don't really know exactly how the Higgs contributes to gravity, only that it does. It's essentially irrelevant for our LIGO discovery. 

Question :What's next for LIGO? It seems to me that the observatory has now fulfilled its purpose. Where does it go from here? Are there other uses for it; other things we can discover with it?

Answer :The "O" in LIGO stands for "Observatory."  You can think of LIGO as a gravitational wave telescope, as opposed to the many telescopes for light located all over the world (and in space).  We now have a way of "observing" the universe through gravity, instead of just light.  

The goal of LIGO wasn't to make the first detection and then shut its doors.  The goal of LIGO is to be a tool for us to  learn about the universe in this new way, and we are eagerly waiting for more detections to add to our knowledge in this new-found observational field. --TBL


Question :How do you guys think this will change the way we understand the universe? 

Answer :The direct detection of gravitational waves really marks the beginning of an entirely new era of observational astronomy. Up until now it's like we've been watching a movie with the sound turned off. You get a lot of information just from seeing, but it's only half the story. With LIGO we've finally cranked up the stereo!

We hope to learn a great many things about compact objects like black holes and neutron stars: from the astrophysics that governs how they form and evolve, to how they interact with each other and the surrounding universe. And as other observatories (like eLISA and pulsar timing arrays) develop, we’ll start to will answer questions about supermassive black holes in the center of galaxies, the way dark matter is distributed in the universe, and maybe even start us on the way to understanding dark energy!

But I think the most exciting thing is all the stuff we don’t expect! Even this discovery surprised us in a way by showing not only can you get 30+ solar mass black holes naturally, but they can evolve and merge within the age of the universe. And that’s only the beginning! Gravitational waves are going to answer questions we haven’t even thought to ask yet.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[Edit: formatting]

Question :How often should we expect to see gravitational events of this magnitude?

What's the 'next step' in gravitational astronomy?

Answer :How often we see events depends on the sensitivity of the instrument.  We found this 1 event to be the loudest signal in about 39 days of calendar data.  So, a rough estimate is that if we keep the detectors the same, we could see about one event this loud per month.  In practice, we hope to increase the sensitivity of the detectors, and find an even higher rate.  JBK, at Caltech



Question :Would a planck scale teacup spill its contents by a Surface-Gravity wave if it were hit by a GW ~ ?

Answer :At the  Plank scale, it's far too small to hold tea.

Source: I'm British.

BP - IGR & LHO Fellow

Question :What is love?

Answer :Its a very poor score in tennis arising from mispronouncing the French word for nothing, which incidentally appears as the 5th character in GW150914.

Question :What doors have we,  as a species, opened with this discovery?

Answer :The ultimate goal (I presume) of GW-Astronomy is to get the Primordial GW Background, remnants of which were emitted at the Big Bang itself. This primordial background is similar to Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) but emitted somewhere between 1.0e-42 - 1.0e-21 seconds after the Big Bang during the Inflation epoch. The CMB only goes as far as 100,000 years after the Big Bang, and it is the furthest we can see in time currently with CMB. Hence, GW Background will take us back further in time at the very birth of universe, and allow us to analyse the state of universe at that point of time. But such a background is really weak [at a strain magnitude of 1.0e-30 - 1.0e-27]. This is 1,000-1,000,000 times less that your current sensitivity. Plus, such a background is rumbling at very low frequencies, where the Seismic noise is huge for ground-based detector(s). We'll have to go to space for this; enter eLISA mission (Einstein Telescope?)!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Does the discovery of gravitational waves points toward the existence of a graviton?

Answer :No, but the pattern of the waves does put a limit on the mass of the graviton, if it exists. If the graviton existed and were more massive than about 10^-58 kg, the waves would have been distorted in a way that would have been noticeable in the experiment. -GL, assistant professor, Fullerton, CA

Question :An optical astronomy friend of mine asks: "Are gravitational waves distorted if they propigrate through graviational potentials (i.e. warped space-time)?".  

Answer :Yes, absolutely they are! Gravitational waves can be 'lensed' by gravity, just like light is. In fact, when we calculate how we expect the gravitational wave signal to look, we have to take into the account the gravitational potential. This is what makes binary black holes such a great test of general relativity, because their very strong gravity makes this a big effect.

- AL, postdoc, detector characterization, AEI Hannover

Question :How can you be sure that the energy radiated away in the black hole merger was lost predominately due to gravitational waves and not due to some other mechanism (e.g. EM radiation)? 

Answer :We can't be sure that nothing else was emitted. The waveform is in great agreement with General Relativity (GR), which, if correct, predicts this energy loss (and is consistent with the energy we detect in GWs). If it ALL went out in light, the sky (for that fraction of a second) would be brighter than the full moon! We had telescopes pointing in the direction of the event (minutes, hours later), we await word from our partners whether they saw anything. Maybe the Fermi gamma ray telescope saw something; they're not sure. - AlanW

Question :So what does this mean for humanity?

Answer :Everything we know about the universe outside the solar system came from different kinds of light (visible light, x-rays, radio waves)...until now. Gravitational waves let us observe the universe in a whole new spectrum, and this will let us learn about what's in the universe and how it works. It's like when Galileo first looked at the sky through a telescope...it was the first step to changing our understanding of what's out there, beyond Earth. -GL, assistant professor, Fullerton, CA

Question :The headlines have concentrated on the gravitational wave discovery itself, but how important do you consider the breakthrough in making the first observation of such strong field general relativity dynamics in Nature?

Answer :Extremely important! So many of the tests of Einstein's relativity have been in the "weak field" (the limit of gravity we're used to dealing with -- like on Earth, or in the solar system). The precession of mercury, gravitational lensing, and even the *propagation* of gravitational waves can all be tested in this limit.

But the *source* of this event was extremely strong field -- the merger of two ~30 solar mass black holes! And Einstein's relativity came through with flying colors. We saw no appreciable deviations from relativity, which speaks a great deal about the integrity of the theory!

I'm sure there will be much more to say on the nature of "strong field" general relativity as we see more and more of these sources. It's an exciting time to be studying GR!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :What was the first thing you did after you found out the result?

Answer :Truth is, there wasn't a "moment" in which we found out. It was a slow process. First you get the e-mail that there was something in the data that looked a lot like a detection. At that point you hope and your heart jumps a bit, but you know that it could be a thousand things: an injection, a glitch in the instrument, someone pulling a prank... Then people all over the collaboration start checking the parts they are responsible for: hardware, software, analysis, infrastructures. As "green lights" come in over days and sometimes week, the awarness starts to sink in... and at some point it clicks in your mind that you should just start to believe it really happened. LIGO did it. It worked! And you are happy! :-)

GC, assistant scientist

Question :Can someone enlighten us on the choice of journal PRL for this paper? Were the reasons historical or political?

Answer :PRL was the right choice for the science we wanted to present.  There was some political pressure to publish in a more "flashy" journal, like Nature, but we decided to focus on the results rather than the politics. [ME, MIT Prof.]

Question :With the detection of gravitational waves, can you possibly ELI5 exactly what is carrying this wave? I know, I'm reading that it's space-time, but what does that really *mean*? Waves on the ocean, for instance, are propagated on water, and we know what water is made up of, but space-time is made up of- what? Gravitons? Or is it the case that science doesn't really know what space time is made up of, and this is a common question?

Huge congrats, by the way.

Answer :LIGO_Astrophysics' answer hits the nail on the head! In addition:

Sometimes analogies can seem insufficient on an intuitive level--especially when thinking more critically on the subject. It's very difficult to think of some of these concepts without, ultimately, exploring the mathematics behind them, because mathematics is ultimately the language of physics. It's like trying to fully grasp the nuances of Goethe without being able to understand German. Randall Munroe explains it best: https://xkcd.com/895/

It is this quest to fully understand "why" that drives people like us, and it's encouraging to get these same questions asked right back at us!

-- CB, PhD Student, Louisiana State University at LIGO LA Observatory

Question :Do you guys get a lot of money as a direct result of the discovery?

Answer :The National Science Foundation funds LIGO in 5 year increments so we don't expect an impact there. What the direct detection does accomplish is it removes the "When are you guys going to find something?" question from the discussion. That alone should make funding for University groups, international collaborators and the field in general easier to come by.

For people who are building a career in gravitational wave physics this is extremely good news indeed. As someone who was a graduate student 25+ years ago I'm a little envious. (BO'R)

Question :How can you date the origin of the gravitational waves?

Answer :By measuring the signal carefully, we can tell about how far away it was. We do that by measuring the masses, from how quickly the signal chirps, which tells us how loud it was. And we know how loud it sounded at the Earth, which tells you the distance. Since the waves move at the speed of light, a billion light-years equals a billion years that they've been traveling. The numbers aren't exact, but that's the idea.

-- AL, postdoc, detector characterization, AEI Hannover

Question :Can observing gravitational waves help understand the role of Dark Matter and Dark Energy in the universe? 

Answer :Our understanding of Dark Matter and Dark Energy come in part from our understanding of gravity.  Gravitational waves are a consequence of gravity that we now, for the first time, are able to measure.  As we continue to observe gravitational waves we will continue to learn more about gravity and it is possible, though no guarantee, that they will guide our understanding of the "dark side" of the Universe.  --TBL

Question :This is for Dr [Nergis Mavalvala](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nergis_Mavalvala), Professor of Astrophysics at MIT, /r/Pakistan is very proud of your work, and hope this will spur further research opportunities here.

Should an opportunity arise, would you be willing to come and run a research institute here? Do you think we have the skill base for that?

Answer :Unfortunately, Dr. Nergis Mavalvala is not a part of this AMA. We can certainly forward your good wishes and questions to them though!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut


Question :I'd think that a hundred PhDs in physics would know better than to cross the streams. See what happens?!

But seriously, it seems like a wild idea: someone in a meeting says "two black holes are about to merge" let's use that as our wave generator. What was the actual series of events/ideas that led to today?

Can we create a detectable artificial source of disturbance?

Answer :Don’t worry, alkalait. There was always a very slim chance we'd survive!

Jokes aside, the thought that massive sources of gravitation could produce gravitational waves has been around for 100 years. Though it wasn’t until twenty-or-so years ago that numerical relativity simulations made it to the point where we could produce — start to finish — the expected signals from the merger of two black holes. Needless to say we’ve come a long way since then.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :So if I unterstand it right. Every form of matter which moves along the spacetime is emitting these gravitational waves. So the universe must be like a restless sea of waves which are amplified or eliminated. Right? So how could they really be so sure about that the fusion of two black holes would have created this big gravitational wave and not another incident in space? Furthermore ... Is it possible that one gravitational wave could be so large, that it would swallow all other smaller gravitional waves in its way and becoming to a gravitational superwave? How would spacetime react in this, if this is possible... (May be a not so profound question...) thanks!

Answer :Using Einstein's equations and supercomputers, we're able to simulate the merger of two black holes and predict what the corresponding gravitational wave signal will look like. The signal we detected matches this prediction exactly, so we're very confident that we have observed a merger of two black holes, and not something else. The event we detected was incredibly strong; your intuition is exactly right about the presence of a quieter "restless sea," though. For every loud event like the black hole merger we observed, there are many more events that are too quiet or too far away to be detected directly. These all contribute to a "stochastic background" of gravitational waves. A stochastic background is like being in a crowded room -- all the conversations around you merge together into a constant hum. LIGO is currently searching for the presence of this gravitational wave background! --TC

Question :Has LIGO also opened up new ways to study the Earth, too, because of the instrument's incredible sensitivity?

Answer :LIGO is extremely sensitive to seismic disturbances, and will most likely see most of the earthquakes anywhere on the planet, even ones that you yourself wouldn't necessarily feel. There are somewhat related projects however, with similar measurement principles, with more concrete applications to study the Earth. In particular, the Grace satellite mission uses two satellites that orbit Earth in a low polar orbit. One spacecraft follows the other and they monitor their separation. Changes in the Earth's gravitational field accelerate the leading spacecraft first, such that the two satellites can map the local variation in Earth's gravity. The first iteration of this mission used microwaves, but follow-on missions are likely to use laser interferometry to monitor the inter-satellite distances.

JE, Postdoc (Advanced controls, thermal noise, and cryogenics).

Question :What should a high-schooler  like me should do to work in an Observatory as big as LIGO?

Answer :It's never too early to get involved in science! Even with a collaboration as big as LIGO. 

You can start by talking to your science teachers! Ask them questions! If they're interested, suggest that they check out the [LIGO Research Experiences for High School Teachers](http://www.ligo.org/students_teachers_public/research.php) summer programs so they can learn more about LIGO and bring it back to the classroom! 

Try reaching out to LIGO researchers at a local university! Many of us love doing outreach and talking to enthusiastic students of all ages. Maybe ask if they could come talk at your school about the big discovery! 

Once you're getting ready to graduate. Aim for a college or university that has LIGO scientists doing research there. Then, even as an undergrad you can do research through the [Research Experiences for Undergraduates](https://labcit.ligo.caltech.edu/LIGO_web/students/SURF/about/overview.shtml) summer program, or by becoming a [SURF](http://www.sfp.caltech.edu/programs/ligo_surf).

But the best thing you can do, is exactly what you're doing now! Ask questions, get excited, and try to learn as much as you can. Science is all about curiosity!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :Congratulations to the team! I've really enjoyed the presentations and explanations--what an outstanding job bringing this news to the world. There's water-cooler talk about gravitational waves. Just fantastic!  

To LIGO_LA, my question is: G&J or Wayne's BBQ?

Answer :I'm at the WA site right now but I have worked in Livingston in the past.  Wayne's ribs all day.

-VR PhD Student, U of Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :Has Neil Degrasse Tyson contacted you guys? He's one of the first people I looked up on Twitter for comment, since I figured he'd be quite excited... But his last tweets are about the Superbowl, which is kinda disappointing to be honest. 

Answer :He hasn't contacted me *personally*, but if you see him tell him he should give me a call! I'd be happy to tell him all about our discovery! ;)

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :Do you or your coworkers watch The Big Bang Theory?



Answer :Most people do not like it.  I personally don't dislike it at all.  It's obviously stereotypical and can be frustrating at times because of some of that, but I also think it can be funny at times.  I don't quite understand the vehement hatred for it.  I don't watch it often though, to answer your question.

-VR PhD student, U of Oregon LIGO Hanford WA

Question :What are your thoughts on the current financial crisis impacting LSU and all of Louisiana? Also how if at all will it impact yall?

Answer :I just heard about that this morning from a colleague who came here from LSU. Suffice to say, I'm very sad to see the state of things in Louisiana... 

Thankfully, I don't think there's much direct threat to our observatory in Livingston. Though I leave that answer to my colleagues which are more informed on the matter.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :From what I understand, you were doing a test-run before even going fully operational, so the planned precautions of 'fake injections' etc. weren't even in effect yet, and you found your first detection the day after you started taking data. The initial paper hints at another one. This is from a run that lasted much longer - how many more have been detected? We're all very curious what the rate for BH-BH mergers is going to be.

Answer :All we can talk about is the detection and the one other possible GW (we're not claiming that it is) mentioned in the papers.  Sorry, I know that's a disappointing answer.  Complete analyses will be performed and released in the future.  Hopefully future observations will not require the same 5 months of vetting that this initial one did.  But yes, we are looking forward to getting better rate estimates as well.

-VR PhD student, U or Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :How "lucky" were you to catch this event during a period when you were listening? Two merging black holes seems like a rare event...is this like hitting the lottery or is are there are least two black holes coming together somewhere in the universe all the time?

Answer :It's hard to accurately estimate a rate from this short observation time, but we think that every 15 minute a binary system collapses somewhere in the universe. So it's not really a rare occurance - but we're still very happy we caught one so early in our procedure (much earlier than we expected!) and that it was such a beautiful specimen, too! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development, Hannover, Germany

Question :How did you know what to fit the signal to? I understand that the signal is distinct and clearly resembles two merging massive objects, but how did you know exactly how to adjust the parameters to fit the signal? I would imagine that these systems are too complex to get an analytical solution from. Do you have a grid of different parameters obtained from different numerical simulations with varying initial conditions (such as different initial masses)?

Answer :I'm an experimental guy, but I'll try to answer this anyways. But I guess you answered this yourself: numerical relativity parameter fit algorithms would be my guess. I saw a graph today stating that the total CPU time spent on this signal alone was 50.000 hours. We know pretty much instantaneously that this signal was from two quite massive black holes, but to get all the parameters with error bars seems to be more challenging. (we have data on their spins and such :) ) If you want to know the details, this guy might be your man: http://www.phys.ufl.edu/ligo/#people/member/sergeyklimenko
(“I work on detection and reconstruction of gravitational waves with networks of detectors”)
~ SB, postdoc, University of Florida

Question :Why was the press conference stopped deliberately in the middle of asking questions? 

Answer :There's only so much time you have for questions at that moment, as far as I'm aware... Judging from the German press conference I was at, they had some scheduled interviews with media outlets that they had to get to - and we wanted to start celebrating as well at some point ;) I'm not trying to make excuses for anyone, but I'm sure there was no evil intent. After all, we're here now all weekend to answer any questions you might have wanted to know the answer to! 

Justus S, PhD student in high energy laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :1) Do gravitation waves have directionality? I assume so, and that's how you were able to triangulate where these black holes were?
2) Do they decay in space the same way you would expect from a point source, i.e. rarefecation into more space? Or is there some other paradigm?

Answer :Yes, they definitely have a direction. They travel from the source outwards. And yes, we use the time of arrival at the two detectors, plus some more sophisticated information about the relative sensitivities of the detectors to sources with certain orientations, to localize the source. We also send this information to partners astronomical observatories, so taht they can point in that direction and look for some coincident electromagnetic signal. Unfortunately, localizing the source with weak signals and only two detectors is a difficult task and the uncertainty in the result is big. Further detectors expected to join the network in the coming years (VIRGO, in Italy, later this year) should considerably improve our localization capability.
As of decay, far from the source the amplitude of the wave decays as 1/r, where r is the distance from the source.

Question :Is it true that the gravitational field at the event horizon of a sufficiently large black is not all that strong?

Answer :[CORRECTED & FURTHER COMMENTS DELETED]

No, that's not true! The average density of a Super Massive Blackhole (SMBH) is close to, or even less than, say - density of water [One must be careful here when we define 'average density'. Since BHs don't have a 'surface', we usually consider their Schwarzschild radii to be their effective boundary]. Their Schwarzschild radii extend very far away from these objects [since it is proportional to their mass, not density!], which makes the Tidal forces [due to local small-scale variations in gravitational force/field between lengths r & r +dr] very weak. The strength of the gravitational field is *expected* to go inversely proportional to its mass [1/M] 'at' the event-horizon [~classical Newtonian treatment in the *vicinity* of the event-horizon of the Blackhole]; this is - however - **not true** since the Newtonian approximation breaks down in the *vicinity* of the Schwarzchild radius of the Blackhole. The gravitational field at the Schwarzchild radius is *always* equal to what one would require for a photon to escape; this value is constant and large! But remember, one will not feel the Tidal forces as strongly *in near vicinity* of event-horizon [of a SMBH] as compared to the case of a stellar-mass blackhole [gravitational field gradient is small for a SMBH!].

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :If the observation was made in September, what process entailed until now that made it possible to verify and release a statement?

Answer :1. Double-check if the signal wasn't due to a 'Blind Injection'. [Blind Injections: We insert fake signals into our detectors sometimes. Only a handful of people (I believe 3 is the number) in the executive committee know about such an injection. It is meant to be a test for the search pipelines.]

2. The next thing to do was to rule out malicious intent by someone [if someone injected a fake signal without authorisation]. There was a good amount of sherlock-ing going around to rule those possibilities out. We had to get into the mind of the criminal [:D] and see what possible ways there were to make a malicious injection. We didn't find any evidence of that either after two months of rigorous work [lead by Matt Evans at MIT].

3. Once the authenticity is confirmed, the results were followed up with CBC searches [The initial detection was made by cWB pipeline, which was followed by a re-confirmation by CBC pipeline]. This takes time. 

4. Once the CBC searches confirm the signal and generate a matching wavelet, we estimate the parameters of the source. 

5. The results are triple and quadruple-checked. Papers are written and circulated within the collaboration for comments. Follow-up companion papers are also done in parallel. 

It is a long process!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I teach high school physics and we discussed this yesterday during class. A student wants to know: How were you able to determine that the waves were from 1.2 billion years ago?

Answer :Determining when the event happened is equivalent to determining how far away the event was. All of that information comes from analyzing the waveform. The frequency evolution of the waveform tells us the masses involved. One we know the masses we can work out how much energy should be involved, or how big the GW should have started. We know how big the wave was when it reached us on Earth and we know how big it should have started out. We also know how GWs lose energy with distance (amplitude ~ 1/r). Those three bits of information give us a measure of distance, which gives us the age of the event.

-VR PhD student, U of Oregon, LIGO WA site

Question :If these waves where first produced from the merger 1.3 bil years ago.  How long before these waves stop  passing through earth.?

Answer :They already stopped for that particular event [GW150914], within a few milliseconds. The signal waveform is a 'chirp' [like a pulse] with a pulse-width [i.e. chirp duration] of roughly ~0.2 milliseconds.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Why is a Nd:YAG laser used instead of a laser with a shorter wavelength? AFAIK the measurement accuracy depends from the wavelength.

Answer :Yes, it does - but the detector is so much more than the laser! Specifically, we have to choose a wavelength at which we can build optics and end mirrors that have the properties we're looking for. It turns out there are a lot of materials that you can use for 1064nm light. For future detectors, we're actually looking to upgrade to 1550nm light, because we can use crystalline Si for the mirrors which can be cooled cryogenically to reduce the coating noise even further. 

Apart from that, it's actually really useful to have the laser at a wavelength our eyes are not sensitive to. Sure, adjusting things can be a bit more difficult since we have to work with viewer cards and photodiodes instead of just relying on our eyes - but it turns out a 180W laser is *really bright*. One of my colleagues once did an experiment where he frequency doubled a 10W 1064 laser (much less power!) to 532nm, which is the green colour you'd get in a green laserpointer. Even though the laser is focused, just the stray light that came from scattering was so bright you couldn't look at the beam. It's impossible to work with - not even taking into account that we need to wear eye protection, and for a visible light laser at 180W the protection would be completely opaque. 

So it's a mix of available technologies and practical considerations that trump out the slight improvement in sensitivity we'd get from using a shorter wavelength. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Reposting this.

In the experiment you talk about the black hole merger releasing 3 solar masses worth of gravitational waves. I understand how this is possible due to conservation of energy and E=mc2 but I don't understand is where the energy is coming from. For example, if I'm understanding correctly, every time I move around (accelerate to be specific) I'm releasing very very weak gravity waves. Do these waves mean my mass is reducing every time I move? Do these act as basically a very weak resistance to my motion and instead steal from my kinetic energy? (Like the old concept of an aether in space?). Do these slowly steal energy from the orbits of planets around their stars? I'm also wondering how the gravity waves "choose" which form of energy to take from as there's presumably many sources of energy to choose from.


Answer :Yes, every time you move around you technically cause gravitational waves. However, these are incredibly weak even compared to the signal we measured. Your mass is quite small - this means that the energy you release as gravitational waves is also minute. You lose many orders of magnitude more energy by your body maintaining its energy, by evaporating sweat from your skin, by splitting up food, by lifting a finger. These processes all take much more energy than you lose through gravitational waves.

So gravitational radiation is a very weak energy release process - this explains why they were so hard to detect. If rotating systems lost a massive amount of energy to gravitational energy (equivalent to the force of gravity being much stronger), we would have found them much sooner, after all! The reason why we like black hole binary systems is because a) they are very massive, so they will release waves at an observable amplitude, but also b) because of something called the No Hair Theorem. This theorem states that a black hole has no observable properties other than its mass, its electric charge and its angular momentum. This also means that the only way a black hole binary system can lose energy is through gravitational waves - this is, in a way, also related to why the energy loss is so massive. It's a narrow path, but it's the only path. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Hi all, I'm a reddit noob and this is my first 'Ask us anything'. 

My question: What are the implications of finding gravitational waves on everyday human life, if any?

Will anything change, are any fantastical inventions closer to existing etc.

Answer :Without wanting to seem self-aggrandizing... you're in luck, some people have called this the best AMA in a long time ;) 

Gravitational waves have a huge impact on how we observe the universe. So far, we've only been able to watch any object that emitted electromagnetic radiation - be it stars, nebulae, accretion disks, quasars... Anything that didn't radiate light was quite literally dark to us. 

Now that we can use gravitational waves to observe the universe, theoretically everything that has mass is within our scope. So while before we could only see things, now we can listen to the universe. It's a very exciting time, and a new era of astronomy!

As for everyday life - there is no direct implication that is immediately obvious. But on the other hand, most times something groundbreaking is discovered, those implications come with time! And even if there are no direct benefits, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration has developed many areas of technology so much further than they were before, until they were at the point where we needed them. This development is now available for mankind to use for whatever they can think of. So to that extent, I'm sure your life will be improved as a result of our research effort! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :What's the role of GEO 600 going ahead? I assume it's been retired from front line duty, but may still serve as a technology test-bed? 

Answer :GEO 600 is not yet retired and is continuing to take science data with a very good up-time in a mode we call "astro watch". GEO is of course much less sensitive than the advanced LIGO detectors and it would take a lot of luck and an extraordinarily strong signal for GEO to be able to see anything. But since it would be such a pity if there was such a strong event and nobody would be listening, we are still doing our best to cover as much time as possible, especially when no LIGO detector is online.

That said, GEO has always been a technology test-bed and this will be its primary function in the future. Examples of current work are new control techniques for beam alignment, correcting thermal deformations of the main interferometer optics, and improvement of the interferometers quantum noise (GEO is the first GW detector to regularly employ so called [squeezed light](http://www.squeezed-light.de/)). Testing such things not only in table-top experiment but also in a full-scale detector brings valuable experience for then using them in the advanced observatories.

ES - PhD student at GEO 600, working with squeezed light

Question :How do you feel that you've not only opened up a new frontier of astronomy, but also inadvertently opened up a new frontier on "Yo Momma" Jokes?  Such as:

Yo Mamma so fat, when she danced, LIGO had to recalibrate their instruments

Apologies in advance.... This is the internet

Answer :Yesterday I talked to a friend in Germany (I'm in the US) and told him that we detected his mom dancing with a friend, so yes there has been a little of that.

-VR PhD student, U of Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :Why are black holes considered to be holes?

Answer :They're considered holes because that's how GR describes them as. It's as though they distort the surface of spacetime so far that it is practically punctured! Once you're in, there's no way out.
BP - Glasgow University and LHO Fellow

Question :It is my understanding that General Relativity makes a specific prediction about the polarization of gravitational waves. Was polarization measured during this experiment, or what would be required to measure it in future experiments?

Answer :[Edited]

This is probably a really naive answer [rather, most probably!]: If we linearise Einstein's Field Equations to derive the simplest analytical solution for wave-strain, we expect to observe the simplest first-order ~~spherical/~~circular polarisation. This is what you usually see in simulations where objects contract in one direction and expand in another. However, there are corrections to this solution which arise when we treat Einstein's Field Equations completely [or, when one considers a competing theory!]. The higher-than-linear-order contributions are very small for our sources and therefore, we do not explore them. Even if we wanted to, we'll need methods to separate those tinier effects in Data-analysis, as well as sensitive mechanics [more misaligned detectors?] to detect these offsets. [AlanW will elaborate more on it, taking into account the orientation of our detectors]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I'm curious about the detector. I just heard Neil deGrasse Tyson say it's so sensitive that it can detect quantum vibrations in the wires? Is this true?

Answer :The detectors are indeed what we call *quantum noise limited* for certain frequencies. At these frequencies the only thing stopping us from detecting a signal is the noise arising from the momentum imparted to the mirrors by the photons, and the fact that photons are produced stochastically by the laser. We're basically trying to measure mirror motion that's smaller than the motion the mirror gets from the momentum of the photons hitting them. That still blows my mind. [SL, interferometry PhD student, Glasgow]

Question :A lot of the talk I've heard surrounding the discovery of gravitational waves concerns its effect on the validity of Einstein's theories of relativity. How does the LIGO team feel about the discovery in terms of supporting his theoretical claims? Are there other major scientific claims affected by the outcome of the LIGO experiment as well?

I'm so happy you guys were able to announce such a successful experimental result, and hopefully we can see more funding thrown your way and towards the general scientific community so we can make even more groundbreaking discoveries!

Answer :This is basically the last big prediction of GR to be confirmed, so it's a milestone in that sense.  Considering that we are looking for GWs, I think it's logical that most of us here were hoping they existed!  And yes there are other scientific claims that LIGO has influenced or will influence.  This first detection's waveform already carried evidence that gravitons are spin-0 bosons.  We also calculated some limits on the mass of the graviton, which is of course related to its speed.

-VR PhD Student U of Oregon, LIGO WA Site

Question :Gravity Probe B's findings show that Earths rotation twists space-time, does that effect the result?  

Answer :It agrees as far as I am aware.  Both frame dragging and GWs are predictions of GR (two important ones).

-VR PhD Student U of Oregon, LIGO WA Site

Question :is /will there any effort being made to actually determine the direction of this (or future) signals more exactly then 'southern hemispere'?

Answer :Yes, asbsolutely.  If more detectors are built (which is happening) then we will have much more precise measurements of direction.  Some future GWs might also be accompanied by an EM counterpart, which would give us a very precise direction.  That would allow measurements of gravity's speed as well by comparing the two different signal's arrival times.

-VR PhD Student U of Oregon, LIGO WA Site

Question :that split second moment, when the two black holes combined and multiple solar masses worth of the two black holes were converted into gravity waves and otherwise disappeared ...  does a black hole also  dissipate on its own?   

Answer :I'm a little confused how the first part of the question relates to the last part, but BH's do actually radiate away energy.  Technically.  That's Hawking's most famous work as far as I know.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hawking_radiation

It works through quantum effects.  A spontaneously produced particle pair near the event horizon can have one get trapped while the other escapes, lowering the overall mass of the BH.

-VR PhD student, U of Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :Is a gravity wave produced when regular stuff falls into a black hole?

Answer :In principle, yes! Any time any mass is accelerated, it emits gravitational waves - as long as it's not perfectly spherically symmetric. The Earth going around the Sun produces tiny amounts of gravitational waves, as does anyone just shaking their hands or dancing. Or throwing small things into a black hole. But it would usually be so weak that not even a super-LIGO could detect it.

With future space-based detectors (eLISA) we will look for what we call "extreme-mass ratio inspirals" - but even that would be a small black hole or a star into a huge black hole, not some "regular stuff" in the sense of a baseball or a book. Almost everything radiates; sadly not everything is detectable.

DK (data analyst)

Question :How would you explain to someone (like me) who has no idea what any of this means the importance of your discovery?

Answer :When Galileo used a telescope to look at the sky for the first time, he opened up a new window on the universe. Soon, telescopes were able to see stars and galaxies from far away, and we learned more and more about the universe around us.

LIGO is a new way to understand the universe, one that doesn't use light like a traditional telescope but gravitational waves. Our data is in the audio frequency range, so the analogy we use is that finally we can "listen" to the universe. This means we can start understanding things that we thought would exist and haven't seen before (such as black holes colliding), and hopefully things we didn't even imagine would exist!

-MT, graduate student, quantum enhancement for aLIGO

Question :I'm super scared of black holes, what's the most beautiful thing about them?

Answer :https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaghettification

Beautiful might not be the right word, but I enjoy this aspect.  Won't really help with your fear of BHs I guess.

-VR PhD Student, U of Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :I still can't wrap my head around the fact that the mass of 3 suns simply evaporated and was released as these gravitational waves that were so weak by the time they reached us. Do we have any idea how often events like these happen? How strong were the waves (the strain) closer to the merger? Would they have had any catastrophic effects on bodies closer to the black holes? Lastly, is there any simple way to think of the mechanism that caused this sudden burst of energy, was it simply from the rapid motion of the black holes right before the merger?

Answer :I think it's a struggle to get your head around, even when you work in the field :)

GW150914 helped us to make a better estimate of how often we expect to see events like this, and we now think we'll see black hole mergers, like the one GW150914 came from, at a rate of between 2 and 400 per cubic gigaparsec, per year. We'll need to observe plenty more before we can have a better estimate though!

If we were really close (within a few thousand miles) you'd be able to feel the wave passing through your body (a bit like standing next to a bass speaker at a music concert), but you'd need to be really close for the wave to be catastrophic.

The energy was produced from the mass of the black holes. Einstein's theory of special relativity told us that E = mc^2, that energy was equal to the speed of light times the square of the speed of light. This conversion of matter into energy is what allows nuclear power to work, and it's the physical principle by which the energy for gravitational waves is produced.

--DW (I work in burst [transient events] data analysis at the University of Glasgow, Scotland)

Question :Can the oscillation of a charged particle in space due to passing gravitational waves result in photons being emitted?

Answer :In nutshell, it is possible for a general charge distribution. [More detailed answer to follow]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How do you feel about [some people](https://news.google.com/news/story?ncl=dAP6OvrmKyrb9_M7g7Unhu69TjUkM&q=b.o.b.+flat&lr=English&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwis8IynhfPKAhWIVT4KHUqPD8gQqgIIMTAB) claiming that the Earth is flat in 2016?

Answer :They should visit one of the LIGO sites (in Hanford, WA or Livingston, LA)!  The interferometer arms are so long that you can notice the curvature of the Earth.  The tubes have to be perfectly straight for the laser light but the ground they are on is curving away as you get closer to the ends.  --TBL

Question :Dear scientist , telecommunication stent here, first I would like to congratulate you for this, not a scientist but I want to become one, so maybe this question will sound stupid.

1) are gravitational waves related to electromagnetic waves, I mean it change them? 
2) I'm interesting in the technical stream that you guys made , not the NSF , do you guys have a link of that stream

Thank and I wish you the best 

Answer :It's already been answered so I'll just add another line or two. EM waves correspond to photons and GWs correspond to gravitons. From a theoretical perspective both are massless bosons. So they are both (gravity and electromagnetism) long range forces that operate at the speed of light. They also have differences though. For example, GWs are tensor waves and EM waves are not. That basically means that an accelerating charge will emit EM waves but it takes acceleration of a system's quadrupole moment to emit GW waves. So there are differences with what causes them to be emitted.

-VR PhD student, U or Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :Did LIGO win the lottery? 

Given the available information (if any) about the distribution of binary black hole systems, how often should a merger occur within an observable distance? Will LIGO ever see another merger again?

Answer :Most of us expected the first detection to only be a matter of time, and I'm pretty sure if I played the lottery with that mind set I'd be broke pretty quickly! But I definitely like to think this event was the universe's way of rewarding us for our patience! :)

Regarding the distribution of BBH systems -- yes! This result put excellent lower limits on the rate of BBH mergers. But it's still a pretty big range. If you consider everything from the 16 day stretch of data around this event, we can say that there are between 2 and 400 of these events per year per *gigaparsec cubed* (which is a -- very large -- measure of volume). 

Further observations will help constrain that event rate even further! And yes, we absolutely expect to see more mergers in the years to come.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :How are gravitational waves related to gravity?  
Was the new observation a measurement of difference in gravitational pull from the black holes due to the distance differences to earth while the black holes were revolving around each other?  
Or are gravitational waves something completely different than gravity?

Answer :Gravitational waves are a form of gravitational fields, but a different one than the "pull" we feel from the Earth. The unified description is given by Einstein's General Relativity, but the key difference is that the Earth's pull on us is mostly static, whereas gravitational waves are sent out by accelerating masses. They are travelling messengers of varying, extremely strong fields.

So no, we didn't measure directly a change in the pull from those two black holes. Gravitational "pull" has infinite range, but it becomes extremely small at great distances (inverse square of the distance), and it overlaps with all of the other masses out there, so we couldn't measure the direct pull of these two black holes at all, nor the change when they collided and lost some of their mass. But that mass loss went into gravitational waves - energy that got free from its source and travelled out in all directions, and here on Earth we measured a tiny part of it pass through.

DK (data analyst)

Question :Is Einstein's original paper (in English) predicting gravitational waves available for access? Please post link.

Answer :Einstein's paper with Nathan Rosen is available online here: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016003237905830

-- DW (Burst [unmodelled transients] analysis, at the University of Glasgow, Scotland)

Question :Why does the collision/merger of two black holes emit energy in the form of gravitational waves and not some other form of energy? Or is it the case that gravitational waves are a fraction of the total energy released from the mass to energy conversion and that's what you were looking for/detected?

Answer :It's hard to say. By their nature, black holes don't like to emit anything (that's how they get their name) except gravitational waves. We can't say for sure that 3 solar masses were radiated away as gravitational waves only, but we didn't see any other sign of this merger through EM telescopes or neutrinos (that doesn't mean that these other signs were not there)

BP - IGR & LHO Fellow

Question :Hi guys!  This is obviously a very exciting discovery, and it is well timed on my part, since I'm doing a presentation on the LIGO project for my 4th year High Energy Astrophysics course in university. 

My question:  Is there anything really cool/interesting about the LIGO project, or the LIGO detector array that not a lot of people know about that I could put into my presentation?

Answer :From the paper:
"The system reached a peak gravitational-wave luminosity of ~3.6 x 10^56 erg/s."  
Supernova are ~10^51 erg/s, which is about 100000 times less intense.  
This is by far the most powerful astrophysical event ever detected, in terms of luminosity.  (Luminosity is energy emitted per unit time)

Craig

Question :Now that you have demonstrated that laser beams are capable of detecting gravitational waves, what is the next step in the technology? What I mean to ask is, when are you planning on building a giant laser array telescope that you can point at deep space objects and solve the mysteries of Dark Matter?

Answer :As much as I would like to believe that it's primarily the lasers that detected the waves, they would be useless without the detectors surrounding them. The lasers just provide a signal and thus are important as well, but the detector works as a whole. However, many of the technologies we developed using this will be useful in many other areas as well. As for other detectors, there are several more planned that will cover a much wider spectrum at even higher sensitivities in the future as well. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development, Hannover, Germany

Question :What does the curve look like for a falling tree?

And what sort of system would you need between massive bodies to recreate that curve? 

Asking the important questions here. 

Answer :We have only tumbleweeds here at LIGO Hanford, so far they did not show any effect on our measurements))

DT, UTRGV

Question :With the direct discovery of gravitational waves, are we any closer to uniting general relativity and quantum mechanics? If so, in what ways?

Speaking of the "holy grails" of science, which ones would you have the most interest in? e.g. room temperature superconductor, nuclear fusion power, etc. if you couldn't choose quantum relativity?

Third question (sorry!) How has the observations matched up with supercomputer models of mergers?

Answer :We put a limit on graviton mass, which helps the the theory of quantum gravity, but for now, that's as much as we can do. But maybe we'll learn new fundamental knowledge along the way that will help uniting the two theories. For the second part, as physicists, we're interested in learning about any "holy grails" of science but for now let say gravitational wave astronomy is my personal pick. 
T.C, grad student

Question :How is it possible that the frequency of the gravitational waves match AF?  My question is how is it possible that we can actually hear the waves. It's quite incredible in my opinion.

Answer :The actual waves are waves moving through spacetime, so they cannot be heard in any way.  The frequency of the wave depends on the source.  LIGO is built to detect BH binaries and neutron star binaries, so it's frequency dependent sensitivity is roughly ~10 - 300 Hz.  Other sources will have very different frequencies.  LISA for example is designed to observe low frequency waves, so detections that it makes will not be in the AF.

-VR PhD student, U or Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :So how soon do you think this information will be added into high school science textbooks? :P

Answer :That's a good question. I wonder how much textbook writing pays... maybe I should go call a publisher. :P

- AL, postdoc, detector characterization, AEI Hannover

Question :Did you expect to have a positive signal so quickly after this LIGO upgrade? Or did you expect having to wait until further upgrades?

Answer :Personally, I was not expecting it to happen.  Certainly not so cleanly and so soon.  I expected to have to wait and I expected the first detection to be faint and somewhat ambiguous.  Instead it was soon and it was loud.

-VR PhD student, U or Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :Does the detection of these waves actually prove Einsteins theory of relativity? 

Answer :A theory can never be proven absolutely, but we can collect overwhelming evidence for it. Relativity (both special and general) have long been universally accepted as extremely good descriptions of reality and there are many verifications of its predicitions. For example the details of planetary orbits around the Sun (perihelion precession) and the gravitational deflection of stars close to the sun, both tested already in the 1910s. Or more modern tests with lunar laser ranging, detailed Solar system studies, gravitational lensing, cosmology, binary pulsars...

...and now the one missing prediction: gravitational waves! It's not that anyone was seriously doubting their existence and the theory behind them, but it still took the world 100 years to actually nail that one.

Now the open question is: what are the limits beyond which the theory needs modification? More gravitational wave observations will test in in unprecedented detail in previously unobservable extremely strong gravitational field situations, and maybe that will show some tiny deviations from GR that point to a deeper, underlying theory.

But even if we ever find deviations, Einstein's theory will remain a) beautiful and b) true within a domain of applicability that encompasses all of everyday life and almost all of the observable universe. Newton's theory also wasn't falsified with modern experiments, it was just superseded an generalized by Einstein's.

DK (data analyst)

Question :How much energy does a gravitational wave carry?

Is there an equation regarding it?

Answer :This one carried approximately 3 solar masses of energy.  We know that from comparing the BH masses before and after the event.  Technically some of that energy could have been in the form of EM energy or something else.  For this situation that's the easiest way to get an energy.  There are GR equations and solutions that give that kind of information.  For a pretty simple example see "power radiated by orbiting bodies":

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational_wave

-VR PhD student, U or Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :I live in Baton Rouge, think there's any chance I can get a tour of the Livingston Observatory?

Answer :Definitely.  They do tours frequently I believe.  In fact, they have an entire building devoted to public outreach.  The Hanford site doesn't have that.

-VR PhD student, U or Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :Are gravitational waves affected by gravity? If light (basically EM radiation) bends round a mass, would gravitational waves bend too?

I'm having difficulty with the concept of gravity being the wave and gravity bending round the body at the same time too. 

Also, have gravitational waves passed through the event horizon of the two black holes colliding? Does this mean we can communicate through an event horizon?

Answer :Yes, bending of gravitational waves around big masses (gravitational lensing) is expected. Also see these two questions/answers: https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czxs3ng and https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czxsi3b

In fact, for gravity it's even crazier than for light: all mass and all energy gravitates, so even two passing gravitational waves (very slightly) bend each other.

The event horizon is still the limit to what we can see, even with gravitational waves. But the merger of two black holes is so highly dynamical that we can (in principle) observe quite a lot of how the horizon of the merged object wiggles around right after the merger - the "ringdown" you see at the end of this figure from the detection announcement ( http://ligo.org/science/Publication-GW150914/images/fig-3.png ). It isn't measuread as cleanly as the first 2 stages in the case of GW150914, but will surely get very interesting in future observations.

DK (data analyst)

Question :We know that light waves can be bent by a significant source of gravity so my question is can gravity waves to bent by gravity?

Answer :Yes, gravitational waves can be lensed, and we have to use this when we're trying to recover source parameters. There's a more detailed answer here:
https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czxs3ng

Question :I read that the collision of the black holes, for a moment, released 100x more energy than all the stars in the universe. I found that hard to believe. Is it true or not? If it is true, how long was this moment?

E.g this article http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/gravitational-waves-exist-heres-how-scientists-finally-found-them

Answer :More power.  That means more energy per time, which is very different.  That statement is true for a very small fraction of a second.  I think there were some inaccuracies in that article.

-VR PhD student, U or Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :So is LIGO working right now? Or are you giving it a break, since it did such a good job?  

Answer :We have been commissioning (upgrading and doing work) in recent weeks.  LIGO is currently at about 1/3 of design sensitivity, so there is a lot of work to do.  If the sensitivity increases by a factor of 3 then the volume searched increases by a factor of 27 (V ~ r^3).  One of the important next steps is to increase the laser power in the arms.  Right now we are answering questions on Reddit, so this is kind of our break.

-VR PhD student, U or Oregon LIGO WA Site

Question :I'm probably too late for this - but how do you expect your results to be confirmed?


Answer :With science this big, we have to do our own confirmation. That's why we built multiple detectors which both saw the signal. It's a little like how ATLAS and CMS in the Large Hadron Collider both saw the Higgs signal. Ideally we'd like a network of detectors across the globe to corroborate each event, and we will have this in a few years when Virgo, KAGRA and LIGO India join the observations. [SL, interferometry PhD student, Glasgow]

Question :This might be too technical, but can you explain how in the world you can measure an effect of size 10^(-18) meters (this was the number I saw quoted before in relation to the 4km distance between detectors)? How can you physically get down to that level of precision? Are the results model dependent? Thanks!

Answer :It's really pretty neat! First of all, interferometers measure changes in length on the scale of the wavelength of the light, so we're already at 10^-7 m. We're operating at the dark port, so very little light exits the interferometer - this means we are very sensitive to when we have a signal, and at 1mW the photodiodes can measure a precision of 10^-13, I think - so we're already at 10^-20! Now we can also consider the fact that we're measuring this length change over the length of several kilometers, which adds another factor of 10^3 - hence we arrive at our desing sensitivity of 10^-23. However, the sensitivity somewhat depends on the frequency of the wave, and aLIGO is aiming to find signals between around 30 and 300Hz - so our models are shaped to reflect that. 

Justus S, PhD student developing high power lasers, Hannover, Germany

Question :Do you guys see any long-standing theory being discredited in future due to this discovery?

Answer :The discovery of this specific event agrees very well with the predictions of General Relativity, and to my knowledge it isn't in tension with any long-standing theories. 

But you can rest assured that gravitational wave observatories like LIGO will among the frontrunners in testing astronomical theories of all kinds. And I certainly expect that some of those tests will lead to interesting surprises!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: accidentally a word]

Question :[deleted]

Answer :All of our astronomy knowledge comes from EM observations.  Much of those observations are from outside of the visible spectrum and came from instruments specifically designed to look at a particular band of the EM spectrum.  Glancing at this wiki page (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X-ray_astronomy) gives an idea of the various things discovered and studied through x-ray astronomy alone.  This is the first instrument ever made that can observe the sky through gravitational radiation as opposed to EM radiation.  We have an entirely new spectrum to study relating to an entirely new force.  There are expectations but realistically we (or other GW scientists) will probably find lots of surprises and new information in future years.

It's not too different from Galileo studying the stars with his telescope for the first time.  It didn't immediately change all of science but think of all the astronomical research that it led to down the road, and all of the knowledge we have about our universe because of astronomy.  This is the beginning of GW astronomy and someday it could be as fundamental to our understanding of the universe as EM astronomy currently is.

And two ~30 solar mass objects orbiting each other at half the speed of light is simply cool.

-VR PhD student, U of Oregon, LIGO WA site

Question :It seems to me this all depends on knowing the time at multiple sites at the same time. How precisely can you keep them all synchronized?

Answer :We synchronize all data acquisition at each site using a dedicated timing network. At the top level this network is then synchronized to external GPS signal (one of the best timing reference we can get). Thus the two sites are synchronized through GPS providing a timing accuracy of sub-micro second (at each site, we have two GPS system just to make sure). At each site, we also have Cesium atomic clocks as secondary time checks on the GPS timing. The dominant uncertainty comes not from the timing set up, but how long the control signals take to reach the mirrors which is on the scale of 10 micro-seconds.
SK - olemiss/LLO

Question :If the black hole at the Center of the milky way collapsed, how would it compare in magnitude to the binary collapse? 

Answer :A black hole is already as collapsed as it can be, really - at the center of it we expect a singularity, which is a massive object with no physical extent. It's a dot. However, there's actually an interesting background to your question! 

We're expecting supermassive black holes like the one at the center of the Milky Way to 'wobble' slightly - and this wobble would cause gravitational radiation! However, this would be at a much lower frequency and we would need a space based detector such as eLISA to detect it, but we think it will tell us much about these supermassive black holes that are very hard to observe with traditional astronomy.

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development, Hannover, Germany

Question :What other events do you expect to observe with the current LIGO observatories and how much of an improvement in sensitivity would a space-based system such as eLISA provide over the earth-bound detectors?  What additional events would you expect to observe with eLISA?

Answer :We're expecting a fairly steady rate of events - throughout the universe, there's one every 15 minutes! So as our sensitivity improves, we'll also see more events. aLIGO is mostly focusing on binary systems mergers, involving both black holes and neutron stars. 

The key difference in eLISA is that the arms are much longer - millions of kilometers, in fact! This means that eLISA will be looking at a much lower frequency range, hoping to detect waves emanating from supermassive black holes as well as primordial waves (background radiation due to the inflation of the universe).

 I don't think eLISA is projected to be more sensitive than aLIGO at this point - however, with an expected launch in 2036, many things can still change! 

Justus S, PhD student developing high power lasers in Hannover, Germany

Question :Does this discovery tell us any new information about the nature of black holes?  Will it help us resolve the discrepancy between relativity and quantum mechanics?

Answer :Mostly no. We are still in the classical regime (General relativity is a classical theory) and significant work need to be done to get to quantum theory of gravity. However the observation provides experimental evidence for not one black hole but a binary system of black holes. Also until this point there were no observational evidence for stellar mass black holes with masses greater than 30 solar masses (we do have evidence for black holes with very large mass such as million solar masses). In that sense, it provides some new information about black holes.
SK- postdoc, olemiss/LLO

Question :I've heard so many people say that this makes time travel, or at least viewing the past in some capacity, possible. Is this true in any way? Congrats on your discovery! 

Answer :NO. but: like all signals we receive from out there in the universe, the events that created them are long passed. The gravitational wave signal was created some 1 billion years ago - so in that sense, sure, we are viewing into the past. But so do you if you read an old novel. Receiving information from the past is no problem at all. Sending information into the past is what is not working at all. That would be time travel. (traveling forward in time again is no problem - we do this every day =P) ~SB, postdoc, University of Florida

Question :Is it possible that some matter within one of the merging black holes event horizon get ejected during the merger due to the collision and intense gravity of the other bh? 

Answer :I'm not a theorist, but I'm fairly sure that is not possible. For "some matter" to be ejected but not other matter, it would have to have physical dimensions - but as far as we can guess, the matter is concentrated in a dimensionless singularity at the center of the black hole. Nothing escapes from a black hole - no matter what happens around it. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Bulbasaur, Charmander, or Squirtle? 

Answer :The internet will hate me, but I always started with Bulbasaur as a kid. I like a challenge. 

These days, charmander all the way! It's just hard to find a good fire type until ages later, and grass scales awfully in Gen1. Not that it does any better later... 

As for Squirtle - there are only 6 spots in a team, and a lot of water Pokemon. I mostly choose a water type as my HM slave, so I don't need another one taking up space. Though this philosophy mostly stems from Gen2, which had way too many water HMs (Screw Whirlpool. Seriously). I suppose Squirtle I could work with though. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Hope someone is still answering! If a photon was traveling perpendicular to a gravitational wave, could it travel 'faster than light' for a moment?

Answer :You're in luck! We're going to have people checking in for the next day or so -- we have a lot of scientists in a lot of different timezones who want to answer your questions!

As for a photon riding alongside of a gravitational wave... the short answer is no, it could not travel faster than the speed of light, not even for a moment. 

It's actually a fundamental property of Relativity that the speed of light is the same for *all* observers in *all* reference frames -- this includes references frames being "squished" or "stretched" by gravitational waves! In that way, it is very much the universe's strictest speed limit.

But at least that means a photon will never get a cosmic speeding ticket!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :How cool is it for you to make the name Livingston Parish and Louisiana a name that stands out now in scientific discoveries? I am from the good ole LP and I think this is great! /u/LIGO_LA

Also. Geaux Tigers!

Answer :Awesome, thanks!! We are definitely grateful for Livingston. A lot of great people from Louisiana have participated in making it a wonderful site!

Come visit us at the next science Saturday! https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/LA/page/Science-Saturdays

--MW, PhD Student at LSU 

Question :Wait are you guys from the Albert Einstein Institut in Hanover?

Answer :Yes, some of us are. Many people from Albert Einstein Institute work as part of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC). The GEO 600 detector close to Hannover also belongs to the LSC.

— ES, PhD student, GEO 600, AEI Hannover

Question :Why is this such a huge thing? Wasn't this already predicted and accepted to be true? What are the ramifications of this?

Answer :Einstein managed to predict the existence of something which we as humans with our five senses cannot possibly hope to feel or experience. He did it just with deep thought, some paper and a pencil. It took one hundred years of scientific advancement to realise the equipment and techniques to even begin to search for these waves, and we found them despite the fact that Einstein never thought we would ever be able to do so. [SL, interferometry PhD student, Glasgow]

Question :A few years ago there was some excitement around Verlinde's idea that gravity was not a fundamental force but instead was entropic. Does your discovery disprove that idea?

Answer :I believe not. We know gravity is not 'fundamental' in terms of the fact that it is not a 'force' at all [?]. It is how space-time tells us to behave. Even if gravity was strictly entropic [as far as I know, an entropic field would mean that masses - or rather mass distributions - tend to distribute themselves into a/the state of highest possible entropy (not accounting for degeneracy between states)], unless there is a way to rule out ripples in it, it wouldn't affect our discovery. The entropy debate will then stretch into Classical 'thermodynamical' entropy vs. Statistical 'quantum mechanical' entropy, which requires us to go into Quantum Gravity... you see where this leads to! I have heard a lot of Verlinde's work on entropic form but never actually read into the details of it. [Please treat this as a naive answer by a 2-year PhD student. I hope some of the seniors can answer more elaborately.]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What implications would a negative result have had? What rules out alternative explanations for the results that you did observe?

Answer :1. It would have been disappointing. I am quite young in this field, but there are people who have worked their entire lives; some of them even passed away in course of time. So yes, disappointment. We are glad we did it though! :D

2. We had to be careful, of course, in ruling out other possibilities. One of the other option(s) was a 'Blind Injection' [Blind Injections: We insert fake signals into our detectors sometimes. Only a handful of people (I believe 3 is the number) in the executive committee know about such an injection. It is meant to be a test for the search pipelines.] It was double-checked if it wasn't a blind injection after the signal was picked by our first low-latency cWB search pipeline. The next thing to do was to rule out malicious intent by someone [if someone injected a fake signal without authorisation]. There was a good amount of sherlock-ing going around to rule those possibilities out. We had to get into the mind of the criminal [:D] and see what possible ways there were to make a malicious injection. We didn't find any evidence of that either after two months of rigorous work [lead by Matt Evans at MIT].

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Firstly, congratulations to everyone involved and thank you!
Now, in most articles I've read, there hasn't been much talk about the actual analysing of the data collected by LIGO. I'm interested in what that process involves, who interprets everything and how? At what point and how were you absolutely sure about the finding?

Answer :Thank you so much!

The process of verifying a gravitational wave candidate is pretty involved, especially for the first one, and that's why it took us from September until now to publish our discovery! We wanted to rule out any possible environmental or instrumental noise that could have caused this signal.

The data analysis of this event started with a search algorithm that looks for short-duration signals without any assumptions on what the waves look like, just requires that they have to have coherent signals in both detectors. Another search uses predictions (using analytical and numerical relativity) of what waves from this specific type of source should look like, and this is the search pipeline is the one that got up to >5.1 sigma. A lot of people are involved in both of those kinds of searches, working on the predictions and how to find these signals. 

The first search found this signal within a few minutes of its arrival on September 14, but we were very careful to check that it wasn't some kind of noise. We record >100,000 signals from the detectors and sensors around them that monitor the environmental conditions, and we have different codes that go through all of those to make sure they aren't correlated in a way that could point to the signal having some non-astrophysical origin. Some of these were run automatically, some of it involved a bunch of people poring through hundreds and hundreds of plots and data to look for anything out of the ordinary. Data analysts as well as people who work on the instruments themselves went through checking anything we could think of that could be a noise source. 

You can read another description of this process under "Are we sure that GW150914 was a real astrophysical event?" in this summary of the discovery: http://www.ligo.org/science/Publication-GW150914/index.php

--MW, PhD student at LSU and LLO

Question :Has High Performance (HPC) Computing played a role in helping you achieve this discovery, directly or indirectly? What computing resources (organizations, software, etc) do you use to analyze your data and what can be done from a computing side of things to assist your research?

Answer :Good question! I can comment on HTC more than HPC capabilities [We are in process of adding more & more GPUs to our clusters!]:

1. We have many HTC clusters at our disposal: CIT at Caltech, there is one at Syracuse [I cannot remember the name], Vulcan at AEI-Potsdam; the biggest one is ATLAS at AEI-Hannover [~4,000 compute nodes + ~1,000 GPUs]. [Details here: http://www.aei.mpg.de/96456/20_Computer_Clusters]

2. Besides HTC clusters, we also have a virtual distributed network called Einstein@Home [similar to SETI@Home] with roughly 450,000 volunteers donating their CPU-cycles to us at the moment. It is operated using BOINC OS developed by UWisconsinMilwaukee & AEI-Hannover [Details here: http://www.einsteinathome.org/]. E@H has already helped our Pulsar group at AEI-Hannover to detect 50 Pulsars!!!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What's your best joke about this discovery?

Answer :[deleted]

Question :do you guys like cookies?

Answer :Man, I could use some choco-chip cookies right now. Damn you, O_mann.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How do you know if what you're detecting is not an artifact or electronic noise of some kind. What controls (pos/neg) are used?

Answer :Good question.  We wrote a whole separate paper on this question.  You can read it here: https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500238/public/main

And if I do say so myself, it's interesting and well-written!  You should be able to understand most of it without any specialized knowledge!

-PC (Data Analysis Computing/Optimization - LIGO Lab/ Caltech)

Question :Are there other (theoretical) methods to detect gravitational waves that don't require huge laser interferometers?

Answer :Yes. In fact the first attempts by Joseph Weber used "bar" detectors. The idea is that GWs would make the bar resonate as they passed by. There are still bar detectors in operation today. Another approach is to leverage the fact that pulsars (rapidly rotating neutron stars), emit periodic radio pulses in a deterministic fashion. You can look for changes in the pulses due to the effect of GWs stretching or squeezing the space between the pulsar and the earth. (BO'R)

Question :My friend and I were discussing the finding and he commented that it seemed awfully "lucky" that we found the trace of such an event so relatively shortly (in cosmological time) after the instruments were built. We dug around and I concluded that given the 1.2 billion light year distance the range of the equipment would cover at the very least tens of galaxies, possibly many more, therefore detectable events must be fairly common. He still felt it was a bit lucky, but we didn't have the numbers to make real evaluation.

My question is, do you have an estimate of the number of stars or galaxies within range, and are there estimates for the frequency of detectable events?

Answer :>therefore detectable events must be fairly common

They are. It's expected that we should be able to detect one massive merger per month with the instruments we have at the moment. Either we were indeed extremely lucky, our or predictions about the frequency of such events are not far away from truth. LIGO also found traces of a second event, but the analysis isn't complete or conclusive yet.

I'm answering because I know the answer to your question, but it was also answered by the LIGO team in this thread, for example [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czyi1yr).



Question :Wouldn't the stretching and compressing of space (which the LIFO lasers detected) warm up the earth as the gravity waves passed through? If so, what models are available to quantify the energy exchange that took place (for example, we have models for how EM waves may heat up a blackbody).

If the energy embedded in the gravity waves did not get transferred in some form to the earth as they passed through... then... what's going on?

Answer :Apart from the interferometric design of gravitational wave detectors, there are also other type of instruments that look for gravitational wave signals. The second most popular one, the type that was constructed first, is bar detectors. Like the name suggests they are cylindrical metal bars that exploit the fact that every object (bar) has a natural frequency and gravitational waves can excite those natural frequencies (resonance excitation). In such case the bar would be stretched and squeezed at their natural frequency and using a piezo electric set-up one can read these oscillations. Earth also has a natural frequency and could be excited by gravitational waves. The natural frequencies of Earth is very small and hence it can be excited by low frequency gravitational waves. Since there are many such sources of low frequency gravitational wave signals, we expect combination of these signals to affect the earth. By looking at the the seismometer data around the globe, some of the LIGO colleagues studied the possibility of detecting gravitational waves and they didn't see any. In other words the transfer of energy is negligible (which is why it is hard to detect them). Here is a link to paper,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.1147
SK - postdoc, Olemiss/LLO

Question :Maybe this was already asked but....considering the sensitivity of the instrument, how on earth are you able to rule out all the other seismic and other "noise" present in order to focus on the gravitational waves? It seems like the instrument itself would be expanding and contracting noticeably due to temperature fluctuations alone...and ground traffic...falling trees....people walking...tectonic plates....earth settling...somebody coughed in the lab :) Thanks! This is a fascinating experiment!

Answer :Great question. We have a whole paper on the subject at https://papers.ligo.org P1500238.

We monitor over 100,000 channels to be able to rule out environmental disturbances. But we also use the fact that different noises occur at different frequencies. Just like you can add how much treble or bass your stereo pumps out we can separate noise by the frequencies it contains. It turns out that most seismic noise is very low frequency < 3 Hz. GW150914 left signal in our detector from 30 Hz to 250 Hz. We've gone to a lot of effort to make the detectors quiet at those frequencies. In fact if you look at figure 3 in the detection paper you'll see that our sensitivity is maximal between 100 and 200 Hz.

Temperature fluctuations btw occur on the scale of hours (day -> night for example). So those would be very low frequency 10^-4 Hz or so. The big problem they cause is that they can slowly cause the alignment of the instrument to drift and we have to control that. (BO'R)


Question :1) How likely is is that this GRB is from the BH merger event? 
2) Have you predicted a GRB from a merger and if so, what's the theory?
See article: http://gammaray.nsstc.nasa.gov/gbm/publications/preprints/gbm_ligo_preprint.pdf

Answer :Gamma-ray bursts are theorized to come from binary mergers involving neutron stars, either the merger of two neutron stars or one neutron star and a black hole (both of which are also LIGO sources that we hope to see soon!).  Binary black holes are thought to lack enough surrounding matter to generate any type of electromagnetic counterpart signal.  Nevertheless, we still alerted astronomers to the (at the time) potential gravitational-wave event, and many different instruments searched the area.  There will be a companion paper describing this effort coming out soon, as well as many papers from the electromagnetic groups.

It would, therefore, be surprising if this Fermi event is associated with GR150914.  People are discussing this right now!  It will be interesting to see if Fermi finds similar associations with any future black hole merger events.  -RL, postdoc, UW-Milwaukee

Question :
In the experiment you talk about the black hole merger releasing 3 solar masses worth of gravitational waves. I understand how this is possible due to conservation of energy and E=mc^2 but I don't understand is where the energy is coming from. For example, if I'm understanding correctly, every time I move around (accelerate to be specific) I'm releasing very very weak gravity waves. Do these waves mean my mass is reducing every time I move? Do these act as basically a very weak resistance to my motion and instead steal from my kinetic energy? (Like the old concept of an aether in space?). Do these slowly steal energy from the orbits of planets around their stars? I'm also wondering how the gravity waves "choose" which form of energy to take from as there's presumably many sources of energy to choose from.

Answer :The two black holes are getting closer which means they win energy in the gravitational potential. It is this energy that is radiated away. When you move around you use chemical energy from your muscles. So, yes you are getting lighter but not because of E=mc^2 but rather because you are burning calories. DS


Question :Are there plans to build more LIGO stations to improve our ability to triangulate the sources of these signals?

Answer :Yes, there are! The Virgo detector in Italy is being commissioned right now, we expect it to be operational by summer. With it, we will have a much better way of locating sources. There are also plans to build a third LIGO detector in India - and there's KAGRA, currently being built in Japan. And that's just the plans that have been around for a long time - maybe with this new discovery, we can convince the people with money to let us build even more detectors to do more awesome science! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Congratulations on what must be an extremely exciting time in your lives! My question is what are the immediate applications you can think of for these results? What might be the biggest way it can affect the lives of the average person?

Answer :Fundamental research typically has less of an immediate payoff. If you are interested in technology transfer, look at this web page https://www.advancedligo.mit.edu/tech_overview.html. Keep in mind that 50 years ago computers were the size of a house and could do little useful work. Now, you carry one in your pocket. DS

Question :so there were 3 black holes involved?

Answer :Yes, that's a way to look at it - although those three black holes weren't all interacting with each other. Two black holes orbited each other, as energy radiated away as gravitational waves they fell into each other and eventually merged into a third black hole. This black hole had three solar masses less mass than the combined masses of the original black holes, because this mass had been radiated away in the form of gravitational waves. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Because we ourselves were impacted by the gravitational wave, did we collectively time travel as a planet? Even if miniscule

Answer :No, not really. Time will just slow down or speed up a little. Look also here https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czzml3p DS

Question :Firstly, congratulations! Is it possible to replace the communication methods using gravitational waves instead of radio? If possible, what would be the new changes?

Answer :That is far-off thought. It may [will!] never happen! 

1. Gravitational waves are not mechanical or EM waves; they don't carry energy relative to space-time. This is the first problem.

2. In fact, they energise/jiggle the space-time itself and at very low amplitude. If space wasn't as stiff; it may have been possible to decouple these 'jiggles' on a 'commercial' scale. However, reducing the stiffness of space-time fabric in our theories is a catastrophic change; all physics will implode!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :[deleted]

Answer :It won't be hard to repeat it - we know our setup works now, so we just have to keep doing what we're doing and at the same time work on making the next generation of detectors even better. We're expecting around 1 event per month, but this rate estimate may change depending on what we actually observe during the next observation run. This is new ground - it's very exciting for us as well! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Thanks in advance.

Can gravity waves pass through a BH (i.e. enter a 3rd BH and exit it). In other words can gravity waves enter and escape a faraway BH ? 

Are gravity waves the only thing that can escape a BH ? 

How can GWs escape BHs (which prevents everything from escaping) ? 

Will some GWs reflect-off and transmit-through a BH ?

Answer :No. Think of them like light beams. The one difference is that their wave length tends to be much larger. They can bend around a black hole, but if they fall in, their energy is absorbed by the black hole. DS

Question :I am signing off for today. This maybe the end of this AMA. The questions are starting to repeat, so please look down the list for answers. DS

Question :What happens to gravity waves when they pass through a black hole? Since space is not continuous inside the black hole.

Question :Congratulations to the whole team on this achievement!, thank you for your dedication and effort in this endeavor. 

Knowing what I know of the dynamics of gravity, where it comes from and how it affects us (nothing, really) and understanding that maybe this question is a bit too "sci-fi",  I wanted to inquire about the possibility of these 'gravity waves' being utilized as an energy source (maybe for travel?). 

You guys are seriously inspiring btw. Keep up the good work. 

Answer :Gravitational waves carry huge amounts of energy - the GW150914 event radiated the equivalent of 3 times the mass of the sun. But the reason they are so hard to detect is that gravity is such a weak force. (For example, a tiny magnet can pull up a needle against the gravitational pull of the whole earth.) So even huge energies in gravitational waves have tiny effects on anything they pass. Or you could imagine it as gravitational waves rippling the fabric of space-time, but this fabric is incredibly stiff, so it only moves a very little.

So you can in principle extract tiny amounts of energy from gravitational waves, but there is no realistic mechanism to use it for travel or anything else

But we can use it as a great information source about the universe, and that's equally cool!

DK (data analyst)

Question :Congrats!  I visited LIGO in the Hanford reach a few years back.  I couldn't believe how massive LIGO is.  Anyways, from your prespective is there a possibility of commercializing the research outcomes recently or god forbid weaponizing it?

Answer :Making LIGO able to detect gravitational waves involved advances in technology, such as making better mirrors. These kinds of advances could have commercial applications. We don't have to worry about weaponizing gravitational waves. The waves we can generate on our own are far too weak to ever measure, and the ones we can measure are still so weak that they are very hard to notice, even with a precise instrument like LIGO. I don't think the technology for the instrument could be weaponized; it's mostly a way to measure changes in lengths very, very, well (better than the size of a proton). -GL, assistant professor, Fullerton, California

Question :Are you using Reddit for the first time?

Anyway, thanks for being awesome people :D



Answer :redditor for 5 years! And infinitely grateful for having an official LIGO account to post with so my colleagues won't find my main account! :P

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

[edit: i accidentally a word]

Question :1) I guess there must be some kind of selection for those who want to work in such organization. How does it look like and how hard is it to pass?

2) Was there main chief for entire project, or did every laboratory had its own?

3) How much money does ordinary scientist earn?

4) Is there anybody who clearly has contributed to the discovery the most?

Answer :1) Each federated group choses its own people. I work at the University of Glasgow so I had to satisfy their entry requirements.

2) Both. There are some people who manage the LIGO project and each federated group has their own principal investigator(s). They all talk to each other regularly to coordinate planning and decisions.

3) This depends on the institute that's hiring you! The pay grades in the LSC are probably standard for physics in general.

4) There are few people that deserve to be mentioned above and beyond the collaboration as a whole, because it's got so many people doing so many important jobs. Probably the most identifiable people during the press announcements were Rai Weiss and Kip Thorne, but there are many others who have made similar contributions past and present.

[SL, interferometry PhD student, Glasgow]

(edit for formatting)

Question :Why wasn't the spokeperson Gabriela González the first person to give the announcement at the press conference? What is the role of the spokeperson if not to speak for the collaboration? I remember Fabiola Gianotti (spokeperson of ATLAS at the time) giving the announcement of Higgs boson.


Answer :The LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) and LIGO Laboratory (Caltech and MIT with many LSC members involved) jointly share the credit for discovery. LIGO Lab is responsible for building and operating the detectors. Dave Reitze is the Exec Director of LIGO Lab. In the end, they both have the privilege to announce; maybe they flipped a coin. - AlanW

Question :There has been a lot of coverage about how a 3rd LIGO detector in India would be hugely beneficial for triangulation of GW sources. Would there be any benefit to having more than 3 LIGO detectors? 

(I know there are plans for much more sensitve detectors such as the Einstein Telescope).



Answer :More detectors pretty much always helps until you get to 5 or 6 (i.e., more that we are ever likely to have).

ET and other future detectors could get another factor of 10 in sensitivity, which would be awesome. [ME, MIT Prof]

Question :What's it like operating the LIGO control room(s)?

Answer :During O1: On a good Observing condition, it's boring. On a bad Observing condition (trouble locking the detector). It's frustrating.

During Commissioning: Everyday is a challenge.  

-- N.K. (Op)

edited because I forgot to sign.

Question :Would your rather fight one LIGO-sized duck, or try to calibrate a thousand duck-sized LIGOs? 

Answer :I would fight the duck and die in battle. Calibrating one normal-sized setup is frustrating enough, let alone a thousand tiny ones. I choose death! 

-Justus S/ High power laser development, Hannover/Germany

Question :[deleted]

Answer :There are the immediate implications: GR is correct even in the strong field regime, binary black holes exist and merge, and we can detect GWs with interferometers on Earth.

And there are the potential astro implications which will come with more events: big back holes like the ones we detected are from massive stars.  These stars are like the dinosaurs of the universe, and BHs are like their bones (what is left when they die), so understanding the universe's population of BHs is like digging up dinosaur bones, except that we to learn about the history of the universe rather than the history of the Earth. [ME, MIT Prof.]

Question :First of all congratulation, truly amazing work! 
I have concerns about the numerous claims over the Internet that this detection/measurement did in fact directly confirm the propagation speed of gravitational waves. 
Which according to the papers and the data is not the case as the vector of gravitational wave could not be determined with high enough accuracy via only two detectors. 
Could you please confirm this? Thank you.

Answer :Thanks. We have not yet precisely measured the speed of GWs. One can make a loose bound based on the 7ms difference between arrival at Hanford and Livingston. But its trip over 1 billion light years has not been timed (we'd need some EM energy from the source, which we haven't seen ... unless Fermi has, 0.4 ms LATER). 
But, we have placed a strong bound on the mass of the graviton (see our papers), based on the lack of dispersion observed in the waveform. Best limit so far! - AlanW 

Question :Would it be possible to map something on the edges of the universe?

Answer :It is possible that gravitational waves were emitted from the very first moments of the universe, just after the time of the big bang.  If so, it may be possible to observe these some day.  In fact, the Bicep2 experiment is looking for evidence of this.  If discovered, this would be a very exciting result!  JBK, at Caltech

Question :How can you use this discovery to conduct more astronomical observations in the future?

Answer :The LIGO and Virgo collaborations have prepared very thorough "search plans" before Advanced LIGO was first turned on - so we had basically already figured out what we're going to do over the next months.

Of course, now that we know that such heavy black holes exist and are a prime source for our detectors, they will certainly receive some extra attention.

But we are equally intent to find other sources, like neutron stars. Especially because we expect electromagnetic counterparts (visible light, infrared, radio, x-rays...) to come from these sources at the same time, and then we can cooperate with the wider astronomical community in joint observations. A program that was already exercised during the first observing run with many partner facilities. (Results still under evaluation.)

DK (data analyst)

Question :Congratulations to the scientific discovery of the decade I really admire the precision in engineering. My question would be how you estimated the mass of the colliding black holes and if EM-radiation was emitted in the process of collision?

Answer :Thanks for the congratulations!

All the gory details about estimating the mass (and other properties) are free to read here: http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.03840

But of course I can give you the short version: from General Relativity, decades of pen-and-paper work and modern computer simulations, we could predict what a gravitational wave from many different sources with different masses or spins would look like. We then simulated huge numbers of those and matched each with the measured data from the two detectors. Roughly, the masses determine how quick the signal moves through our sensitive range, if we see the final collision inside of it, and the exact shape of the oscillations inbetween. So we report the values for which the simulations best match the measured signal, and the number and distribution of the others that match slightly less well tell us how confident we are in these values (the "error bars").

Your second question on EM radiation: sadly, black hole binaries are not expected to emit much of that - because they are black, meaning that not even light escapes them. However, as soon as we had found the signal, alerts went out to partner institutions with optical telescopes, radio telescopes, x-ray and gamma-ray satellites. They looked at the sky region we pointed them to, to see if maybe there was something unexpected happening. The full results of those studies are still being collected, stay tuned until next week or so!

DK (data analyst)

Question :[deleted]

Answer :Abbott is a lucky guy!

About the 4 signals: Either Rai did not understand the question, or the journalist did not understand his answer, because we haven't finished analyzing the data from the second half of the observing run. 


Question :Does this discovery mean everything gives off gravitational waves? Will it be possible to eventually detect anything, such as asteroids or rogue planets?

Answer :Yes, anything that is accelerating and has mass gives off gravitational waves. However, gravity and mass interact *very* weakly, and our detectors are constrained by many different types of noise, such as photon shot noise, thermal noise and seismic noise. To be able to pick up gravitational waves from asteroids or rogue planets would be *very* difficult.
SU - student from Syracuse

Question :How big was the celebration party? 
And is it big enough to create a visible gravity wave? 

Answer :Most of the institutes and universities that take part in the LIGO scientific collaboration had parties. Our Glasgow event was hosted in the physics department and we invited other researchers and students in our building to celebrate with us. [SL, interferometry PhD student, Glasgow]

Question :Now the GWs are finally confirmed. Does/will this additional data help in anyway in the effort of unifying general relativity and quantum mechanics?

Answer :GWs were predicted 100 years ago, most theorists have always assumed they exist, it's just been an experimental challenge for the last 100 years. So, its experimental verification doesn't really advance our understanding of how to unify GR and QM. (It doesn't hurt either!). So far, we are still very far away, experimentally, from observing QM phenomena associated with GWs. The waves are "carried" by 10^53 (or so; don't quote me on that exact number) gravitons; we are not seeing individual gravitons. But we are strongly bounding the graviton mass to be very close to the GR prediction of m=0. - AlanW

Question :As someone working on the pulsar timing array experiments for gravitational waves, I wanted to first say a HUGE congratulations! We've been so excited at the announcement.

The fact that you first saw a double black hole system over a double neutron star system was undoubtedly unexpected. Are there any implications for the rates of NS-NS mergers so far from the (current) non-detection, given that you know with a certain sensitivity that you've seen a BH-BH merger and now have put a constraint on the rate on those? I assume NS-BH would be harder since we haven't yet seen those but I figured with knowledge of known NS-NS systems and then the actual GW signal maybe something could be said on those?

Answer :So far, we are only measuring the rate for (surprisingly high mass) binary black holes (BBH); we can't measure or limit the rate for NSNS mergers until we finish analyzing our data from our observation run (released results are only from the first month of the run). BBH rates don't limit NSNS merger rates (except in the context of a fully understood theory of formation mechanisms, which we don't have and which we are trying to constrain with our measurements). Please see our astro paper on the arXiv.

Question :First of all, Congratulations on the discovery :)

My question :

* Will this discovery have any application on the day-to-day life of general people in the years to come ? 


Answer :Apart from pushing the frontier of human knowledge, LIGO is certainly creating impact on day-to-day life of general people. A lot of these will stem from the kind of technology developed for LIGO. From developing stabilized laser source to seismic isolation as well as data analysis. For example, friend of mine from the national university of Australia was working on an earthquake detection with a technology developed for LIGO. This will promise to detect earthquake at east 30 minutes earlier than current prediction, thus minimize damages caused earthquake. I'm sure that there are numerous applications to come that I'm not aware of. Remember that time that we got internet from LHC? We never know what we can expect in the coming years.
T.C, grad student

Question :So, what will you go do now, after you've confirmed that gravitational waves exist? 

Answer :Try to confirm more of them!

DK (data analyst)

Question :@LIGO_LA - shout out from the Bayou State!  We are proud of you.  Do you expect a lot of visitors for the next open house?  Serious question; I've seen this observation referred to as "listening" versus "viewing" and I get that we've been limited to 'visual' observations until now - but, wouldn't "feeling" be a more accurate description?

Answer :There's a fairly direct link between the observations we have made of the universe so far, and the observations we make with our own eyes all the time - they both measure electromagnetic radiation. Listening is a lot more specific to us - we require air to hear, a medium that can be squashed and stretched carrying the information to our ears. 

The conventional wisdom is that you can't hear in space, because you're lacking the medium - however, we could argue this isn't really the case! Through gravitational waves, we can extract information from the stretching and squashing of spacetime itself - in that way, the LIGO detectors really are like two ears 0.1 lightseconds apart. 

I like your comparison as well - similar to how you can feel the wind on your skin, or the bass in your butt at a rock concert, you could also argue we can hear gravitational waves. But since hearing is a much more nuanced way of detecting air movement, I would still go with that analogy over 'feeling'. Great question, though! 

-Justus S/ High power laser development, Hannover/Germany 

Question :How is the direct detection of Gravitational Waves different from the remote radio-astronomy observation of colliding blackholes by of Russel Hulse and Tylor (1978?) in a binary spiral ?

Answer :Actually, it was Taylor and Weisberg who first observed that the orbit of a pair of neutron stars (not black holes) was decaying exactly as predicted if it were emitting gravitational waves (Hulse and Taylor are the ones who originally discovered this binary system). The distinction is a bit semantic, but we call this observation an "indirect detection," in that only the *distant effects* of gravitational waves were observed. Ours is a more "direct detection," in that we measured the effects of gravitational waves passing directly through an instrument (the LIGO detectors) here on Earth. --TC

Question :Now that you've observed the phenomenon, is there a chance of extracting actionable insights from the data for improving the sensitivity of the detectors, resulting in increased detection rate?

Answer :Absolutely! Here at LHO and also at LLO, there is always work done to try to bring down the noise. We have live outputs of the detector's noise floor, so we can see what's going on real time. There's always something to be improved on. 

Meanwhile, in institutes around the world, LVC members are testing technology for the next generation of GW detectors. It's always an ongoing effort!

BP - IGR & LHO Fellow

Question :[deleted]

Answer :It's in the main paper. The wavelet-template plot has all the information. Here is the summary: http://imgur.com/mHOWqTa

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Is there a lower bound on the frequency of the gravitational waves you can detect?  Clearly the upper bound is on the order of the frequency of the laser used, meaning there is a LOT of available bandwidth.  Do you think there is any possibility this could be used by advanced civilisations to communicate?

Answer :Right now, our main lower bound is from seismic noise. We usually don't look at frequencies below 10 Hz because there's too much noise. The Laser Interferometer Space Antenna will be able to detect gravitational waves at much lower frequencies.

I doubt gravitational waves could be used to communicate. After all, to generate a signal, you need to accelerate a massive object, but we have objects accelerating all the time - planes taking off, rockets being launched, etc. I can't imagine a simple way that an advanced civilization could generate gravitational waves that could be picked up more easily than all these things accelerating around us already.

SU - Student at Syracuse

Question :Where can I find the data about the gravitational "ripple" size/dimensions/equation detected? What would be the proportion between the "ripple" from its origin and the "ripple" detected by LIGO?

Answer :Here is it. A fact-sheet: http://imgur.com/mHOWqTa

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How was the sensor calibrated? Would people moving near it, cars, tidal forces of the moon, etc. throw it off, and how much?

Superb work, btw 

Answer :We can move our mirrors ever so slightly using "photon drive" - a precisely calibrated laser bouncing off of the front surface. We can displace the mirrors by amounts as small as GWs might. We measure the result in the same way as we do GWs: with photodetectors at the output port. Right now, our calibration is accurate at the 10% level; we'll do better soon. Many environmental effects also move the mirrors, and we put enormous effort into shielding them from it. We actively correct for tidal forces, and shield against mechanical, acoustic, EM, thermal, etc forces. We cannot shield gravitational forces!! At very low frequencies, terrestrial gravitational changes ("Newtonian noise" caused by seismic motion or weather) will be a problem for us - we will have to measure them and cancel their effects. It does not yet limit us. We can't shield against GWs ... good for us! - AlanW

Question :Hi guys, here's a bit of an out-there one for you which is something of a two-parter:

Has anyone entertained for a bit of fun the scenario in which gravitational waves could be used to transmit information over vast distances? Obviously with light you have the problem of line of sight, but also absorption of various wavelengths by interstellar dust and gas, and so on. So - presumably grav waves would be a relatively clean channel of communication for a civilization with a vast galactic empire, and technology powerful + sensitive enough to detect and produce them? Are there other hard physical limitations that cause absorption of these things in the interstellar medium and make this not viable (all economics and energy requirements aside)?

If not, has anyone crunched some numbers for fun to see how much energy one might need and whether it'd be possible at all? Say, for an alien civilization of the kind that might have access to Dyson spheres and whatever other fantastical things you could imagine. And how far down in sensitivity from where we are now would we need to go to see something put there deliberately and significantly above the background?

Finally, (it's been a long time since I looked at GR) are there astrophysical processes that produce these things directionally (like the signal you might get from a Pulsar cone)?

Cheers.

Answer :The trouble with using GWs for communication is in the signal production.  It is hard to get black holes to dance to the tune of the signal you want to send.  (Seriously, this has been thought about, but nothing realistic has been found.)

See http://xkcd.com/1642/ for a definitive answer.
[ME, MIT Prof.]

Question :I like to use analogies from classical mechanics to make sense of stuff like this, so forgive me if what I ask sounds a little naive. 

Imagine that spacetime is like a fluid. Can a seismic event in spacetime such as a supernova set off a "surface" gravitational wave in a similar way that an earthquake on the seafloor can set off a tsunami? 

Answer :It's an interesting approach, but I don't think it's a good analogy. First of all, space time doesn't really behave like a fluid - it is incredibly 'stiff' (to use a word from mechanics), which is part of the reason why gravitational waves are so difficult to detect. Also, spacetime doesn't really have a surface to speak of. It extends throughout the entirety of our universe, and outside of it nothing exists that is in any way meaningful to us. So we don't have a surface, and we don't have a fluid. Supernovae do however still emit gravitational waves, as long as there is an asymmetry (which there practically always is)

-Justus S/ High power laser development, Hannover/Germany

Question :Question to AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut.

Were you born and raised in India?

If so then how did you make it to such a big organization given the fact that pure science isn't in a good stage in India?

I am asking as a young Indian highschooler hoping to be a Physicist.



EDIT: Thanks for answering.

Answer :Yes, I was born and raised in India. I graduated from IIT Guwahati in Applied Physics and I took the road less travelled [of fundamental research], despite severe opposition by my father. I did my Masters in Astronomy & Astrophysics in Europe, and that led me to Gravitational Wave Community. There were a lot of coincidences as well; I got to know many people in this field at a very young age at the Max-Planck-Institute in Hannover.

In the meantime, things are improving back at home now. IUCAA is a big part of the collaboration now and we are on our way to LIGO-India too. We are making our mark.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut


Question :Could these alleged gravity wave ripples be used to explain certain quantum phenomena such as particles appearing to be in two places (or in multiple places) at once?

Answer :Quantum mechanics and general relativity do create paradoxes and we know there needs to be an extension to general relativity to explain some aspects we observe in the universe (like the uniformity of the cosmic microwave background that needs some kind of inflation shortly after the big bang). Inflation would cause gravitational waves. Detecting these waves would be evidence of inflation. There are other theories out there which would completely change the nature of our universe (M-theory) that do not produce gravitational waves after the big bang and have a different explanation for the cosmic microwave background pattern. So in this sense, yes: gravitational wave observations could provide evidence for some quantum mechanical theories and disproof others. But we do not directly detect quantum phenomena. (SB, postdoc, University of Florida)

Question :CONGRATULATIONS GUYS!!!!! Great job!!!
My question is, does this detection rule out some modified gravity models? Which ones?

Answer :Unfortunately, no. There are 2 ways to go into non-GR regime:

1. Have very low noise compared to the template residuals [see main wavelet-template plot in the paper] and determine source parameters a lot more precisely. This will help us deduce precise variation of the signal from the expected pure-GR template and hint toward non-GR corrections.

2. To have a large number of these events and compare the observed distribution w.r.t redshift with the predicted source distributions from rival non-GR theories of gravitation [if predicted differently by the rival theory, of course] [besides several other possible distributions which may be required, such as the scale-based correlations {C_l vs. l(l+1)} in sky - similar to how it is done for Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation].

Currently, we have none of the two. So, not yet. There is still time.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut



Question :Does the presence of Dark Matter or Dark Energy change the way in which gravitational waves propagate?

Answer :Yes, definitely in the same way it changes the propagation of light. Dark matter produces gravitational lensing, and gravitational waves do follow the curvature of spacetime as well. Dark energy causes the universe to expand and produces a redshift in signals from far away. The frequency of gravitational waves will experience the very same redshift. (that's the theory. in the future, we will have multi messenger events, where we see a gravitational wave from a nearby supernovae that is observed also electromagnetically. that's when we will see if the arrival time of both signals matches. We should also be able to find a way to have multi messenger astronomy to verify the redshift. If we see some discrepancies, we may be on to some new theory of gravity. If we see what we expect, we confirm Einstein's general relativity once again.) ~SB, postdoc, University of Florida

Question :I've only studied the popular science description so I am sorry if I am asking about something obvious.

Couple of question:

1. How were you able to tell where the black holes collapse. Was it some kind of trilateration or triangulation? 

2. If I understand correctly, both LIGO stations are located in US. Therefore all 4 detectors are situated in nearly one plane. Why such location, not something with much better distinction in all 3 axis?

3. Does GW decay with R^-2 as other waves? Could you make any meaningful conclusions by comparing strain in both locations?

Answer :You're not missing anything obvious! These are great questions!

We were able to work out the location of the event in the sky through a combination of noticing which detector it passed through first (it passed through Louisiana first, so we knew it came vaguely from the Southern hemisphere), and from studying exactly how well the detectors measured the signal (they have a distinctive pattern over which they detect different points in the sky). However, to get a better idea where the signal came from we need more than two detectors.

Both the detectors are in the US, and they're situated on a plane (there are only two detectors: the two arms of each compose a single detector). We'd get a better idea of where a signal came from in the sky if we had more detectors, and we're expecting a third one to come online in Italy later this year, and we're hoping for some more later in the decade, but the process of building and running them is reasonably expensive, and we've got to share resources with lots of other scientific fields!

Gravitational wave strain is proportional to the inverse of the distance from the source, but we expect the measured strain to be the same in both detectors (the distance between the detectors is really tiny compared to the distance from the source to the Earth, so we really don't expect to see any difference).

-- DW (Burst [unmodelled transients] analysis, at the University of Glasgow, Scotland)

Question :At this point I imagine you are all extremely eager to observe this effect from other areas of the universe, so logically, I assume you will be searching for more binary systems and neutron stars to observe any possible gravitational waves emitted by them.  Do you feel you'll be limited by the ability of other branches of astronomy to discover these systems for you to observe?  Or is the technology in place for you guys (the gravitational astronomers?) to begin discovering these systems for yourselves by detecting the signs of gravitational waves coming from the systems?

Answer :We are currently providing triggers for other branches of Astronomy. We have an extensive EM-followup [EM = Electro-magentic] system where GW triggers are sent out to other partners, such as Fermi, IceCube etc. We are able to look further back in time [and redshift] at EM-quiet sources [such as binary BHs here]; it appears that partner astronomers will be following us, instead of the other way around. However, EM-followups are extremely important since they will provide us information about fractional energy radiated by sources in GWs compared to EMWs, and if it deviates from our expectations. It is a critical piece of information!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Are the LIGO detectors currently sensitive enough to observe "quieter" events, such as spinning neutron stars, or supernovae?

Answer :In principle, even the initial LIGO detectors were sensitive enough to do that - because even those "quiet" types of sources would produce relatively strong signals if they just were located close enough to Earth. For example, we would have had a great chance to pick up gravitational waves from a galactic Supernovae even with initial LIGO or with the smaller GEO600 detector. And if there were a spinning Neutron Star with a rather big deformation on it rather close to Earth, we also would have seen it already. That's why we marketed some of our old results as "astrophysically interesting upper limits" - we were sensitive enough to exclude the existence/happening of nearby objects/events that, in principle, could have been there!

And so now with Advanced LIGO, we are sensitive to these types of sources to much farther distances and smaller emission efficiency, hence giving a higher chance of actually finding some. We are still analysing the first data set to look for these, and results might take a while.

If we don't find them, we wouldn't be too surprised - but at least we'd have some quite good constraints on some astrophysical models, or even the fundamental physics of neutron-star matter and supernova explosions.

If, on the other hand, we do find them - and that chance is smaller than for binary mergers, but real nonetheless - it will be just as amazing as this one!

DK (data analyst)

Question :Is there anything other than black hole collisions that we could detect?

Answer :There are many other sources. I will list them here [the main ones] and their relative strength to the binary black-hole source that we detected this time around:

1. Chirps from Black hole-Neutron star mergers: Weaker
2. Chirps from Neutron star-Neutron star mergers: Weaker-er
3. Bursts from Core-collapse supernovae: Weaker-er
4. Continuous waves from isolated Neutron stars: Weaker-er-er
5. Continuous-wave-like transients [faster decay rate] from isolated Neutron stars: Weaker-er-er
6. Primordial Inflationary sources: Weaker-er-er-er-er
7. Cosmic strings[!!!]: Weaker-er-er-er-er

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut


Question :Thanks for doing this :)

As you might have guessed, I thought a bit about the implications of direct measurements recently.

* In theory, could waves from events within black holes, and thus information, leave black holes?
* If yes, what could actually cause that in practice?
* If you can think of anything, what could we learn from that?

Also:

* Would black holes merge instantly when their event horizons (or some other distance) touched?
* Would they still spin inwards for some time? Is this undefined?
* Can we measure this?
* Now or in the future?

Again, thanks.

Eddit: Three replies to a 1-point post in a 869 comment thread where my questions were below the fold. Nice.

Answer :In general relativity, waves and information doesn't leave the region within the black hole horizon. If quantum gravity were relevant, it is possible that information could leave the black hole. However, the black holes detected by LIGO were far too massive-- and therefore too large-- for quantum gravity to matter. No information should escape their event horizons. 

Black holes don't merge instantly when their event horizons touch. Rather, they form a distorted blob that orbits and becomes more spherical over time. This takes place in two phases known as merger and ring down, that can be predicted by simulations of merging black holes and that were actually observed in the measured LIGO signals. These two phases were part of what gave us such confidence that it was a true gravitational wave signal, as well as what helped us reconstruct the masses and black hole spins. Hopefully future gravitational wave signals will give us further opportunities to test our understanding of general relativity under these extreme circumstances as well!

-S.D., graduate student at Louisiana State University

Question :How does it feel!? (observing the waves for the first time, not the waves!).

Answer :Seeing the response of everyone from around the globe, all the articles and interviews, politicians weighing in, all the great questions here - this is really wonderful, and I think it's even better than seeing the waves themselves. A huge thanks to everyone who has followed what we've done and thinks it's as cool as we think it is. :)

-- AL, postdoc, detector characterization, AEI Hannover


Question :(1) if several LIGO units are build across the globe, and sync'd with a really accurate atomic clock, would directional source be a possibility?
(2) I have always wondered... is time linear if it is constantly being distorted? ;-)

Answer :1. Yes, more the detectors, better it is! Since we are 'listening' to GWs, more 'ears' give us more localisation capability.

2. Time is anything but linear. However, one must take into account the bigger picture. Time - on large scales - flows more or less smoothly since universe is very smooth as well as under-dense at those scales; there is not much matter around to distort time [unless the majority of dark component interacts/couples with time strongly!]. On small scales, there are local perturbations in the relative flow of time [say, compared to time-flow on large cosmic scales] due to stars, black-holes and other compact objects. So time is approximately 'linear' on large scales with small perturbations on smaller local scales.

Disclaimer: The term 'scale' here may sound ambiguous but it basically represents redshift difference(s) between two points in the universe.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Would triangulation from a third detector make a major difference to what you could observe? 

Also, it seems like a nightmare to eliminate noise from the detectors.  Are space based detectors a possibility?  

Lastly, do you foresee the ability to observe all mass with this method or only major events like two black holes colliding?

Answer :1. Yes, a huge difference. More, the merrier! Enter KAGRA in Japan, VIRGO in Italy and LIGO-India within a decade.
2. LISA Pathfinder is currently doing test runs for eLISA technology at L1 point between Sun & Earth. We hope to get NASA back on the funding panel for eLISA. It will help us get rid of low-frequency Seismic noise.
3. No, we expect to see Continuous-wave emissions from isolated Neutron stars and/or Black hole-Neutron star mergers soon! 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Hi, congratulations for the great effort you put into Your research, it must feel amazing to see that it came into fruition. What was the Virgo side contribution to the discovery? Was the wave confirmed by their detector?

Answer :Virgo is an important part of the network which we will eventually have on Earth. It's not finished yet - it's currently being commissioned to make it sensitive enough to listen to the same signals that LIGO currently hears. If all goes well it should take part in joint observation runs with LIGO soon! Eventually we hope KAGRA in Japan and perhaps even LIGO India will join. [SL, interferometry PhD student, Glasgow]

Question :Since the strength of the gravitational wave varied wrt time when the two black holes revolved each other, I assume the gravitational waves are not emitted uniformly with uniform strength.  
In what direction are the strongest waves emitted? In the direction of the acceleration of the black hole?

Answer :The dominant gravitational wave emission is a "quadrupole" that looks like this https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iq4l3ypEtHI&index=9&list=PLojJiiU5jHafcLCXmbTfDRc9K8lihMDdX
(two 2D cuts of the same emitting source)

The measured modulation in the detectors depends on the angle the binary has to our line of sight. And of course on the location and orientation of the detectors themselves on Earth.

DK (data analyst)

Question :[deleted]

Answer :Yes, the rate at which such collisions happen in the universe around us is now known to be in the upper range of what astrophysical models had previously allowed for. We actually estimate that the Earth is reached by a black-hole-merger wave about every 15 minutes - but most of them are still far too weak for us to detect, because they come from so far away. We have also put nice quantitative constraints on these collision rates per volume around us, which you can read more about in this summary http://ligo.org/science/Publication-GW150914Astro/index.php and in the publications linked from it.

Other events - there was one more interesting event candidate in the data set we already analysed and reported along with GW150914, but it was far less strong, and we can't be sure that it is truly astrophysical: the false-alarm probability is still a few percent, which is huge compared to that of GW150914. Again, please refer to the link and papers for more detail, or of course you can ask a follow-up.

And beyond that, we can't tell you anything yet - not only because of our collaborations' rules, but because we are actually still analysing the remaining data taken until mid-January, and don't know the final results ourselves yet. Stay tuned!

DK (data analyst)

Question :Can you share about the international aspects of the collaboration? When is INDIGO (Indian GW ~ Obs) coming online?
Who makes the mirrors, detectors, data, software ?

Answer :I can comment on LIGO-India:

It will take [a lot of] time. After the bureaucratic hurdles are taken care of, it will take a good amount of time to get it running. I am guessing, not before 2025.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :With this data, can we begin excluding some modified theories of GR? Also, I'd like to hear how you ended up working on such an incredible project. I'm a physics/astronomy undergrad in my third year, so I'm both excited and anxious to see what sort of opportunities lie ahead and how to get there. Any general advice?

Also, congratulations and thanks for answering these questions!

Answer :The LIGO data puts constraints on parameters in something called the parameterized post-Newtonian formalism, which treats gravity in terms of small corrections to Newton's theory of gravity. It approximates general relativity in the limits where general relativity has been well tested. The LIGO constraints are improvements over previous constraints for many of the parameters. 

LIGO also put a limit on the mass of the graviton. In theories of quantum gravity, the graviton is usually supposed to be massless. But in some alternative theories of gravity, it has a small mass. LIGO constrained its mass to be 10^25 times smaller than the mass of the electron. 

My advice to future graduate students: pick a field and pursue it. Many fields are exciting. Look for schools that have the opportunities you want, but also look for the opportunities available at the school you choose. 

SD, graduate student at Louisiana State University

Question :How does the strength of the relativistic gravitational waves compare with what would be experienced if Newtonian gravitational fields due to orbiting masses existed (even assuming propagation at the speed of light)?

Answer :If you are asking about deviations from a supposedly classical system of emitting energy via gravity, I have no frickin' idea! We'll need to know what this classical system is; there are too many independent ways to devise such a classical system! Maybe you can constrain a few degrees of freedom(s) for us?

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Great stuff, I already asked a (small) question. But would like to cash in a bit more on this great AMA.

1. I read the comments on Python. I myself program in R and wonder why you would for instance choose Python over R for plots and statistical analysis?

2. I would to learn more about astronomy/physics. I have done a course on special relativity but would like to go further. Do you have any tips on learning this on my own? Books, E-courses (such as coursera)?



Answer :1. Python is a popular choice and since we require collaborative work, we choose/require a language that everyone is - sort of - comfortable working with; it makes it easier to float scripts around and add libraries to our own software system i.e. LAL_APPS. We also use C/C++ a lot. I mostly use Bash/Perl + Python.

2. Read books. Start with any book; Weinberg's lectures are my personal favourite!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :It is my understanding that this was the same test used to disprove the aether. How do you explain the results as gravitational waves instead of discovery aether?

Answer :A century of technology development and hugely increased sensitivity! The original Michelson interferometer had no chance of seeing Gravitational Waves.

And a very different measurement quantity: We see gravitational waves as tiny, tiny variations in the output of the interferometer, with a very specific shape corresponding to the predictions of General Relativity; not just by looking at the overall directional/temporal dependence.

DK (data analyst)

Question :Everything I have heard about the design of these devices blows my mind. Congrats guys. My question is this. The event that was detected was a massive event involving some of the biggest black holes we have found doing some crazy spinning. Even then, the laser only changed by a fraction of a proton. Can these machines detect anything much smaller? How small an event can they detect? How small an event do you think they will be able to detect in the future?

Answer :Thanks for the congratulations! About your question: the size (or better: mass) of the colliding objects is not the only reason for how strong or weak a signal in our detector is. A collision of two nearby neutron stars (1-2 solar masses each) could be much louder than what the two huge black holes of GW150914 produced. So yes, we could also detect smaller objects, such as neutron stars, if we are lucky enough.

Or we could also detect mergers to even further distances with smaller signal amplitudes - GW150914 was indeed very "loud", which made our detection case so extremely watertight. We seem to have gotten lucky to catch a "big one" first, but we really hope to catch many small fish as soon as possible.

DK (data analyst)

Question :Why is it so hard to detect this effect from such a huge event, two black holes combining, when we can see the light from distant stars with relative ease?

Answer :Because gravity is really weak. One of the great mysteries of physics is why gravity is so much weaker than the other forces. It's easy to pick up a book, even with the entire Earth pulling on it. But a tiny little flashlight can light up the whole room. The gravitational waves from this event carry plenty of energy, but they just barely interact with us. But if you put out a piece of film, it easily absorbs most of the light hitting it. 

-- AL, postdoc, detector characterization, AEI Hannover

Question :What are to upper limits for binary super massive black holes? I read that some black holes are a billion times the size of the sun. If two of these were to fuse would the waves they emit have consequences different from smaller ones? Are there any upper limits to binary black holes? Trillion solar masses? 

Answer :The biggest ones we know about are in the ten billion solar masses range. We think that these merge as well. When they do, the frequencies are much lower, just like with a musical instrument. So LIGO can't see them, but LISA (a space antenna, hopefully flying by 2034) and pulsar timing (collecting data now) would hear these sorts of giant things. Probably tens of billions of solar masses is the limit for now, because they can only grow so fast, and they've only had 13 billion years to grow so far.

-- AL, postdoc, detector characterization, AEI Hannover

Question :What was it like discovering these.did you immediately know how massive this find was.when exactly did you know you find it and how did you react?

Answer :Frankly, we weren't ready for it. We had just finished our upgrades and were expecting a normal observation run. However because of the significant sensitivity improvement over initial LIGO, the signal just popped up. It is like getting a new pair of glasses and seeing that the world is crisp and clear. Previous estimates of rate of such signal were underestimated (because there were no observation of binary black holes before) and hence we didn't expect it. It took some time to convince ourselves. With initial cross checks, most of us were convinced in a day while a few waited until three months when all the checks were finished. It is always better to be cautious. Everyone realized at that point how big this discovery was. Not just because it supported Einstein's theory, but also because it opened a new era of observational astronomy where we can use gravitational waves to study objects that are otherwise hard to.  

Question :What about this discovery is causing all of the sensation about time travel?

Answer :I think this is a misunderstanding. The gravitational waves travel billions of years to reach us from the black hole binary, but no time travel is involved. This is like how there is a delay when the post office delivers a letter-- just on a grander scale. 

-SD, graduate student Louisiana State University

Question :Congratulations on this monumental discovery! 

I have a two questions:

Aren't we incredibly lucky to even have had the opportunity to record/measure this "phenomenon"? Since the wave had traveled over 1BILLION light years, there would have been a chance that we hadn't developed the technology or rather if we weren't looking in the right place in the sky we could have missed it entirely. 

2nd question: If we can now interpret more data about the universe by means of gravitational waves, what is the immediate application? 

Answer :Thanks! We're all very happy to be able to be a part of it!

Your first question is quite a common one, and there's a nice comparison to this sort of statement that the physicists Richard Feynman once made. He said, "There are billions of cars in the world. So what are the chances that me, just walking down the street to the supermarket, see this exact light blue car in the parking lot?! One in billions!"

The point is, of course, that it's arbitrary to a certain extent. With longer measurement series we will be able to establish the rate at which to expect gravitational waves. They happen regularly and if we had happened to calibrate the detector at that time, we would have found a later one as our first event. If we had gotten a bit more funding a bit sooner, maybe we would have detected an earlier one ;) It's a bit of an arbitrary statement, in the end. There's nothing inherently special about GW150914 - but it's ours, it was our first, and we really like it.

Justus S, PhD student developing high power lasers in Hannover, Germany

Question :Time travel?

Answer :No, sorry.

(ES)

Question :Hi! Amazing discoveries, congratulations for the hard work!

Is there any evidence of these gravitational waves from the VIRGO detector? Has it detected anything? If not, why?

Answer :The VIRGO detector is still in the process of being commissioned, and hence hasn't been in observational mode yet. Because of this, we haven't been able to compare our results with anything detected by VIRGO - this is also the reason our localisation is a bit rough at the moment. Once VIRGO is operational in a couple of months' time, we will be able to observe events with an even greater confidence level and localise them much better as well. Maybe we'll do another AMA at that point for the occasion ;) 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development, Hannover, Germany

Question :Hello. Every layman description that I read about this impressive discovery describes how the space-time contraction/expansion is detected by LIGO detectors. I also understand how the approximate direction of the event can be detected having two separate detectors. However:

1. How do we know the event involved  the collapse of twin black-holes? Is it decided by theoretically analyzing the waves? 

2. How do we know the distance? Is there a Doppler effect in GW?

Answer :I'm an experimentalist, so I'm not the ideal person to answer this - keep an eye on this, I'm sure there'll be a more qualified answer later this weekend! However, from what I know, our theorists have worked out many models using numerical relativity, simulating what a waveform from a certain type of event would look like. Our data analysts then compare the data they get with these waveforms, from which they can deduce what kind of event had caused the waves. In this case, we could find the kind of event, the masses of the black holes and the distance - all from the wave form! If that seems like witchcraft to you, I can assure you I feel the same way! I'm just some experimentalist building high power lasers, these theory cracks are on an entirely different level. We're very glad to have them! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development, Hannover, Germany

Question :Could we, at least in theory, generate gravitational waves?


Answer :In theory, the laws of physics don't forbid it. But that's as far as I'm willing to go with this, really. I think you'd need to at least achieve type III on the Kardashev scale to be able to manipulate objects massive enough to generate gravitational waves. 

Justus S, PhD student in high energy laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :First, my hearty congratulations!
I understand that gravity affects the shape of the space-time lattice, stretching and contracting it. As space-time expands and contracts, how does that change the shape of other objects, massive and otherwise? Do atomic nuclei just get farther apart, or does their shape change in line with the curvature of the space-time lattice?

Question :Does this discovery help the world practically in any way, or is it just awesome and helpful in science?

Answer :Well here I might have to ask for a definition of "practically." Yes, in the sense that the world is helped by all other forms of human creativity, art and music. This discovery pushes the limits of what humans can perceive and reason about. In this case, a 100 year old foundation of modern physics - general relativity - is tested and explored in the *strong field limit* where the equations have influential nonlinear terms. This is where GR behaves as far as possible from the theory of Newtonian gravity which preceded it.

Now for a more.. concrete answer: The scientific program of LIGO is not only improving measurement technologies, it is training physicists and engineers to make not only a system that pushes the boundaries of instrumentation, but one that does so *reliably*. This is a key point and one that sets LIGO a bit apart from many research projects. The LIGO mission is ultimately to become an observatory, which means that all of the laser systems and the mechanical systems along with an enormous amount of support infrastructure, computing and feedback control systems all have to operate full-time. This is something that companies want. New technologies that are proven at this level are what brings them into industry by removing the risks associated with research techniques. Having a source of people who have implemented these technologies and know all of the boring (ahem - to some) details required to ensure continuous operation rather than one time use experimental demonstations is also a great practical value.

Compare the description of LIGO with the common technology of [LIDAR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lidar) used for a number of practical uses. Our instrument essentially takes LIDAR to the logical and technical extreme, motivated by the lofty goal of exploring the universe in a new way.

LM - MIT postdoc

Question :1) How small an object could you detect with gravitational wave detectors?

With a sufficient detector would you be able to track aircraft for example?

2) Do you think anyone will get a Nobel prize for this and if so who?

Answer :It's not about the size of an object but the mass of it. Anything less massive than a few times the mass of the sun would be very difficult to detect... luckily, people have come up with other ways of tracking aircraft! 

Justus S, PhD student in high energy laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :are you sure there wasn't a mini earthquake? it should vary equally, gravity is always balanced and a wave should get steadily weaker or stronger, i'd think

Answer :I think other people have answered toward the nature of these waves better than I could, but I can assure you that we are very, very sure that this wasn't an earthquake. 

Justus S, PhD student in high energy laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :What makes you so sure that the vibrations aren't something else?

Answer :While you can never be 100% sure, you can do your best to exclude any known phenomena. There are a miriad of checks done; I'll list here a few that I consider more convincing:
- consistency of timing, shape and amplitude between the two detectors located thousands of km apart. Probably the most compelling evidence.
- cross checks with the many environmental channels we have (magnetic, seismic, radio, temperature, sounds, etc...), that have shown no correlated disturbance
- exquisite match with the shape (waveform) predicted by the theory

GC, assistant scientist

Question :Is there any prospect of GW events getting cool nicknames as well aas the serious designation? 'Big Dog', 'Mass Effect', 'Dave' etc....

Answer :We often use nicknames to refer to candidate events internally! Though those names are unlikely to make it into the literature. You might be interested to know that there was even an informal poll on our internal wiki pitching different nicknames for this one! (Including some appropriately geeky names, though I guess there wasn't enough element zero to get "Mass Effect" on the list.) 

Ultimately, we settled on the utilitarian GW150914. But in passing conversation many of us simply refer to it as "The Event" -- for obvious reasons. :)

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]


Question :How does the expansion of space (dark energy) impact a gravitational wave as it makes its way across the universe? Does the frequency red-shift in the same manner as EM radiation?

Answer :Yes, there is redshift, as quoted in the abstract of the paper, approximately 0.09. --MW

Question :**1)  What is a gravitational wave?**

Is the wave some sort particle or some sort of burst of electromagnetical radiation that can be quantified? ...or is it simply something we're observing as the space stretches/contracts, which we call a gravitational wave?

**2) Can gravitational waves interfere? What are the implications?**


**3) If we had billions of times more sensitive techniques for detecting gravitational waves, would every single particle with resting mass cause gravitational waves as they move around in the space?**

Answer :You're correct with your second assumption - a gravitational wave is not at all the same as electromagnetic radiation, but it's actually spacetime itself stretching and contracting. In technical terms, it's a propagating solution to the GR equations Einstein came up with :)

Gravitational waves pass through each other, just like other waves. For them to interfere we would have to detect several events at the exact same time... they are generally too short for this to really happen. 

Technically, if you shake your fist you're causing gravitational waves! However, even with these incredibly violent events it's very difficult to detect them - so having equipment sensitive enough to detect waves coming from you shaking your fist is quite inconceivable to me. Never say never though! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :ELI5 please: Is there any possible ways to now generate gravitational waves? In the same way as producing radio waves etc. Also, could you give some examples of a real world use for the ability. 

Great work on your incredible research, looking forward to hearing more!

Answer :Thanks! See my response to a similar question [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czymjm4)

-MT, graduate student, quantum enhancement for aLIGO

Question :First off, thank you for the work you do. It's truly inspiring.

Now for my question, what will the discovery of gravitational waves change about the way that we view and study astrophysics/physics in general?

Answer :Thanks for the interest in the discovery. Our current understanding of the universe comes mostly from observation of electromagnetic radiations (visible light, X-rays, gamma rays, microwave etc.,) from stars, galaxies and beyond. However some objects such as black holes don't emit electromagnetic radiations and/or they might be too far away that the radiation is absorbed by things in between those objects and us. To study such objects we need another type of information carrier and gravitational waves can do that job (the other possibility is neutrinos, but it is much harder to detect them). Unlike light, gravitational waves interact very weakly with matter and hence can travel far distances. For example, it is easy to stop light with a sheet of paper while the same can't be done to gravitational waves. This observation of binary black hole signal confirms that such era of gravitational wave astronomy is possible and within reach of our hands.
SK - postdoc, olemiss/LLO.

Question :How do you detect specific gravitational waves from specific sources billions of years away? How do you isolate and separate the signal from the collective bulk of GW from the rest of the universe?

Also, are these conventional waves with an amplitude, frequency, et al? How long did the signal last, and what did it look like on a computer screen?

Answer :Unfortunately most of the GW coming from the miriad of sources in the universe are too weak for the current sensitivity of the detectors, so they are just masked by the noise. What we are looking for are mostly loud events that make it above our detection threshold, and those aren't so many... just one so far! :-) But we expect more in the future, as we improve the sensitivity of our detectors and accumulate more observing time.
And yes, GW are waves and come with all the characteristics of a wave: amplitude (in unit of strain, i.e. relative change they induce in the distance between reference particles), frequency (LIGO is only reasonably sensitive between ~10 Hz and a few kHz), wavelenght (bound to frequency IF they move at the speed of light, which we think they do), and even polarization.
the signal visible in our detectors lasted about 0.2 seconds... as for what it looked like, it is an oscillation that grows in amplitude and frequency to a maximum, to then quickly decay. It's easier for both of us if you google it and find the image published on the paper!

GC, assistant scientist

Question :When the Higgs boson (particle) was discovered, it was described as a ripple in the Higgs field (wave). Now that you've detected ripples in space-time (a wave), under the doctrine of wave/particle duality what's missing in order to be able to say you've discovered the graviton (particle)? Congratulations on your amazing feat.

Answer :I'd say the biggest thing missing is a coherent theory of quantum gravity. While the other fundamental forces (electromagnetism, as well as the strong and weak nuclear forces) have been successfully quantized, there still isn't a convincing theory of how to do that with gravity. And until that's the case, it's difficult to simply extend quantum concepts like wave/particle duality to classical gravity.

But our results still put some constraints on the properties of a hypothetical graviton, should it exist. Namely that, if it does *have* mass (which it probably doesn't), it is at least a sextillion (1 followed by 21 zeroes!) times less massive than a neutrino -- which are themselves not very massive!!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :What kind of visualisations do you expect future decades to be able to produce using gravitational wave astronomy? It is amazing to be able to detect unseen events in the first place, don't get me wrong, but I am wondering whether you can expect any event localisation at a high enough resolution to produce pretty pictures, and having a hard time imagining what that would look like. Radio astronomy can easily be converted to visual data by remapping the EM spectrum (false colour)--what can you do with gravitational waves though, and how do you deal with the fact it's inherently varying through time? I'm guessing some people will think that until you can show us a picture of something, it's not really astronomy.

Answer :There are different ways of visualising them. You've probably seen the animations of our simulations, showing how two black holes colliding ripple space time. [Here](https://cdn0.vox-cdn.com/thumbor/ttopNEH2Wd9qcSYtiEolYhq-wwc=/cdn0.vox-cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/6030221/gravitywaves.gif)'s one of them. Then there's the actual shape of the wave - it's a quadrupole wave, which look like [this](http://www.universetoday.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/gw-waves-wave.gif). And finally of course, the actual data we measured - you've probably seen that as well. [Here](https://losc.ligo.org/s/events/GW150914/P1500229/fig10.png) is a representation of the strain data we measured. So that's what we have at the moment, and I think we've done a pretty good job of visualising these events - but I'm sure future generations will come up with even better ways of showing the world how it looks. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :As a software developer who works with scientific data processing, specifically a lot of signal processing on data from network analyzers, I'm curious as to what your tool chain looks like for collecting and processing the data. Are there a lot of home built solutions, or is there a fair amount of off the shelf code and tools used? I did see an IPython notebook with some of the data processing techniques but I know that can't be the actual work flow used in house. 

Answer :We collect data using our own design of software and hardware. We call it CDS, and a lot of work has gone in to making it really work well for our purposes. Custom ADCs feed signals in to real-time modules where we run filters, control loops and other time-critical components. This runs on top of EPICS, where we store and distribute data. We record and store data from literally hundreds of thousands of channels!

The data collected from each site is sent first to a server farm in Caltech where it is built into data frames that can be distributed across our worldwide computing grid. The computing grid is where we run our analysis pipelines to search for gravitational waves. We've got many independent pipelines looking for different things with different techniques. GW150914 was found first by cWB, or Coherent WaveBurst, which simply looks for coincident signals in each detector with minimal assumptions, and does this very quickly so that we can alert our EM partners to point telescopes at the approximate part of the sky.

Later on we perform "offline" analyses which search the data for particular waveforms predicted by general relativity. This tells us more about the astronomy of the source, but it involves a lot of number crunching and can only be done hours and days after the events.

IPython has widespread use in the collaboration - but a lot of our code is automated and so doesn't contain an interactive element. It's used mostly for making plots with subsets of our data, or trying out different filters and templates to the ones that our analyses use.

[SL, interferometry PhD student, Glasgow]

Question :Two questions:

I'm thinking one of the many filtering processes you do involves a sort of bandpass- I was wondering what other interesting effects that you've observed in that frequency range that seemed odd, unusual or not typically thought of.   Or phrasing it another way, what sort of non-obvious noise sources made it through your initial filtering plans?


How accurately can you determine the source?  degrees, arc-seconds?

Thanks. great AMA.


Answer :Thanks for participating! I think I speak for most of us when I say we're having as much fun with this AMA as you are!

LIGO noise is notoriously complicated, with all sorts of crazy and unexpected sources. From trucks running over speedbumps miles away, to telephones that got plugged in in the wrong room, to wayward alligators that wandered a little too far from home. I've even heard tell that the Livingston observatory has had run ins with stray hunting bullets (though that may be an old wives' tale). The good news is that there is an entire team of *extremely* talented people who work very hard to characterize all of the potential sources of noise so we don't mistake any of them for signals!

As far as localizing events is concerned, we triangulate the source location by measuring the difference in the signal's arrival time at each of our detectors. With the two LIGO detectors operating, we usually localize events to within a few hundred square degrees (this event in particular was localized to a ~600 square degree patch of sky). Needless to say, it's not exactly pinpoint accuracy. But we can -- and will -- improve on those localizations by adding more detectors! It won't be too long before advanced Virgo comes online we'll be doing much better than just "a few hundred square degrees."

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :When will this be included in text books?

Answer :Hopefully soon! Though, with the state of education at the moment, we're not too sure... We're pretty confident it will be mentioned in all GR courses around the world, starting Thursday. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :What do you think of McMaster leaking the information early? 

Question :How fast do gravitational waves move? 

Answer :According to General Relativity, at the speed of light. And based on what we saw, we have no reason to think otherwise.

GC, assistant scientist

Question :What can this help us understand?

Question :What could be the frequency of another of these events happening? Can we expect another detection this year? 

Answer :There's a companion paper discussing the rates of binary systems mergers at http://papers.ligo.org. We've already seen another event described in that paper, and we think that in the whole universe there's about one binary system collapse every 15 minutes. Before we even started the observation run with aLIGO, we were expecting between 5 and 50 events per year, we're certain to be able to narrow that down in the coming months. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Can we now prove the existence of the theoretical graviton since we have observed wave behavior?

Question :How are you able to tell how far away the black holes are, their size, or even that it was two black holes that your instrument detected? 

Answer :Our theorists run simulations, using a numerical approximation of General Relativity to look at what would happen if two black holes of a certain mass collided. They then can generate what kind of waveform we would expect exactly from a certain kind of event. By comparing the data we measure with these simulations, we can find out what caused them! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Until yesterday, the world of four letter word beginning with "L" and ending in "O" was dominated by **"LEGO"**.

Now we have **"LIGO"** - What do you have to say for stealing LEGO's spotlight ? Did you know if someone searches the term "LEGO" in future, Google will suggest *Search instead for LIGO* and that would be the end of innocence for the word "LEGO".

While you proved Einstein's theory right, you ripped kids' faith on the word "LEGO" :(

Answer :Official LEGO LIGO set, anyone? 

Everybody wins!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :For any of you who work at the Livingston location, what do you do in your free time?  It's joking known around here as the meth capital of the world, so it's hard for me to imagine a bunch of physicist dudes living around there. Also, it's hard to find smart guys around here so hit a bitch up. 

Question :Would gravity waves be expected to affect living beings on earth at all? How far away could an event be and still have negative implications for us?

Question :OK,very dumb question here. The  distance between the earth and moon is  dependent upon the mass of both, but  how do they know what the other is?   Is this where the gravitational waves come in? Is that how the moon knows how heavy the  earth is?

Question :Can you explain the math behind the delay in the detectors signal?

if these waves travel at the speed of light, which is 299 792 458 m / s and the time between detection was 7.1 ms, and the detectors are 3002000 m apart, something isn't adding up.

D = Vt 

Why when doing these equations are the numbers so far off?

I am getting 10 ms or 2128 km, which is quite the deviation. We are talking about the speed of light after all, which should be on the mark, consistently.

Also, why on the overlay graphs were one of the signals inverted? It seems like the graph was inverted to make the data line up better, was this done for cosmetics or another reason?

How long did it take for the black holes to merge? I would expect it wouldn't be instant, even at that extreme gravity.

And finally, are you detecting waves coming FROM the black hole merger, or are you detecting spacetime warping TOWARDS the merger through all matter in the Universe?

Answer :You're assuming the waves travelled directly along a line from one detector to another. Imagine a wave travelling in a direction perpendicular to a line connecting the detectors. Then it would reach both detectors simultaneously. The 10 ms light travel time between the 3000 km separated sites simply defines the upper limit on coincident signals, but in principle they can have any separation time below that. In fact, we can use the exact delay between the coincident signals to work out where in the sky the signal came from.

The signal on one detector had to be flipped to match the other because of the way they are orientated with respect to one another. The gravitational wave will stretch the x-arm in Hanford while stretching the y-arm in Louisiana.

[SL, interferometry PhD student, Glasgow]

[edited to add info about sky localization]

Question :What frequency do the waves have? 

How long does a merger of black holes take?

Do some of these major cosmological events (Eg supernovae) take longer than a human lifespan to occur? 

Do you see potential for a multi-generational project observing some of the events with longer time scales? 

Answer :We observed GW150914 chirping from 35 to 250 Hz - that doesn't mean that it just took place at that frequency, but since we are most sensitive in that area, this is what we saw. A merger of black holes can take a long time when they approach, but the actual act itself is very quick. [Here](https://losc.ligo.org/s/events/GW150914/P1500229/fig10.png) is a representation of our data - the merger was until the amplitude was at its maximum, after that the signal stems from the ringdown. You can see that the decisive phase only took a tenth of a second - in this time, several solar masses were radiated away as gravitational waves! It's unimaginable, really.

The build up to most kinds of cosmological events takes place on time scales much larger than our own lives, or even our civilisation - but the payoff usually comes pretty quickly. Supernovae may take a very long time to prepare, but the bang happens almost instantaneously. 

We're hoping to be able to detect gravitational waves in the mHz-nHz regime with eLISA in the future, but observing events with periods of several years is unlikely to be fruitful. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :If a gravitational wave "found" another gravitational wave from another colide but in oposite direction, how they will interact? One of the waves cancel the other? 

To make it easy, how two gravitational waves interact? 

Answer :They pass through each others, which is what waves generally do. They don't really interact. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :How do you filter out any external vibrations from the distances the sensors are apart (like if tectonic plates move or thunder causes the ground to shake)? Also, how do you know this wave came from the black holes you have been observing?

Sorry if this is answered somewhere, really the most I know about this is from the NYT article/ video about it yesterday.

Answer :Excellent question! I always like when people ask "How did you filter this out" instead of "I think it was an earthquake" ;) 

The mirrors are suspended from pendulums that have several stages, and each stage is actuated separately to counteract vibrations further. This way, nothing that happens to the ground below will affect the test masses themselves. If you download the detection paper from http://papers.ligo.org, there's a picture of the mirror suspensions I think on page 3. 

We weren't observing those black holes - with the waves reaching us at the speed of light, it would have been impossible to know about them beforehand! But we know the results came from two black holes merging, and how heavy they were and how much energy was lost to the gravitational wave because our theorists have simulated events like this, and what kind of waveforms we would get from them. By comparing the waveforms we get with the waveforms we simulated, we can get all this kind of information! Thanks for your question - it's awesome to see how curious people are about our research. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Congratulations on ushering in a brand-new kind of astronomy!

Does the fact that you can detect such an event as this one place a sufficiently low ceiling on holographic noise that the holographic universe model is invalidated?

Question :As a UF grad of physics (2013), where can I find the best articles to read about the detection? I don't have access 5to the sites I used to as a student and like to keep up with the science.

Also what do you think you would be doing if not furthering your education, whether it be in physics/engineering/astronomy or any other subject?

*edit Do the lasers at LIGO have freaking sharks mounted to their freaking heads?

Answer :Great news for you - all the articles relating to the detection are actually open source! You can find them at http://papers.ligo.org. I recommend you start off with the detection paper itself, and then see which of the companion papers you find most interesting. I'm a big fan of the Astrophysical Implications and Detectors in the Era of Discovery ones. 

We're big fans of making our science available to everyone, not just the few who can afford to pay ridiculous prices for every single paper. That's part of the reason why we decided to publish in PRL, not Nature or Science. Living Reviews in Relativity is another journal that LIGO scientists occasionally publish in, which is also open source. The open source science movement is a thing of beauty and it's growing a lot. So if you keep an eye out, I'm sure you'll find a way to keep up with the science that interests you!

Personally, if I wasn't doing my PhD I'd probably work on lasers somewhere in the industry, or I'd do consulting... I also almost got offered a job at an ad firm. Funny how that one happened. I pretty much happened upon this job by chance, actually, and when I started it a bit over a year ago I had no idea about gravitational waves whatsoever... I'm very glad to be here now, though! 

We've got two copies of the aLIGO lasers downstairs in our lab, and while those are just two fairly sizeable, fairly boring-looking boxes with a bunch of cables coming out of them and some awesome optics inside, I don't know what modifications the LIGO guys have made to them. I doubt shark heads are allowed in the cleanroom, though ;) 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Is it possible that the waves that were measured were just the interference pattern of some other events?

Answer :It's very unlikely. The waveform very beautifully agreed with our predictions of what it would look like - it would be hard to fake by some super powerful alien empire, and it's practically impossible that it would happen by chance. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Is there a difference between Gravitational waves and the force of gravity? I keep seeing that that GWs traveled at c, but if Gravity can only propagate at c it means a black hole cannot be warping space-time into itself faster then c. Also means gravitational detectors will be restricted to a delay based off c.

Answer :c is the speed limit of the universe - nothing can move faster than it. This means that yes, everything will have a speed of light delay. E.g. if you removed the sun from its position at an instant, the earth would only start to leave its orbit the same time we saw the lights go out - 8 minutes later, at a speed of light delay. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Are you hiring? 

Answer :With such a huge collaboration, you can be reasonably sure that some institution somewhere is looking for someone to fill one position or another. But if you have the qualifications required for scientific work, you probably know that already ;) 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :So from the distance, the energy consumed in the merging of the black holes. and the level of warping observed, is it possible to gain knowledge into the amount of energy it will take to generate a sustained warp field for a spacecraft? 


Answer :You can use general relativity to calculate anything we observed. No warp fields required. DS

Question :(Even with the previous answers I still have this dumb question) Is there any chance that years down the road we will feel an affect of these waves on earth? 

Answer :It depends on what you mean by "feel" -- you could say that by detecting these waves with an Earth-based observatory we already *have* felt them!

But if you mean whether you or I (or any other *person*) could ever physically *feel* the effects of a gravitational wave, it's extremely unlikely. You would have to be *extremely* close to an *extremely* violent event (like the merger of two ~30 solar mass black holes) to actually be able to feel any kind of sensation from them. Otherwise, they're just too weak!

In fact, [elsewhere in this thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czxno88) a colleague of mine describes a back-of-the-envelope calculation they made to see what a human would feel if they were standing right next to this specific event. I believe the gist was "you could feel it, but it probably wouldn't even hurt."

And that's when you're standing right next two two black holes thirty times more massive than our sun! Wow!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: PS -- Carl Sagan once said, "There are naive questions, tedious questions, ill-phrased questions, questions put after inadequate self-criticism. But every question is a cry to understand the world. There is no such thing as a dumb question." And so keep on trying to understand the world, Jlove! No matter how many answers it takes.]

Question :Do these waves provide any evidence for the hypothetical "graviton" particle, due to wave-particle duality? Or are these waves more related to sound waves instead of light waves, in which they are actually just compressions/expansions of space-time and not a distribution of particle containing energy?

Answer :No, see other answers. DS

Question :[deleted]

Answer :No, our observation is explained by general relativity alone and doesn't require new physics. DS

Question :How did you work out how far away the black holes are, and what is the uncertainty on that number?

Answer :We look at the amplitude (brightness) of the observed signal and calculate backwards. The distance is ~400Mpc and the uncertainty is 170Mpc (with 90% confidence). The error is relatively large because we don't have a good sky position. DS

Question :Was what you detected a "gravity wave" or a "wave in space-time" and how would you define the difference?

Answer :It was a gravitational wave, which is a travelling solution to Einstein's GR equations that takes the shape of a quadrupole wave embedded in spacetime. [Gravity waves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravity_wave) are the ones you can observe at the beach... we've all but given up on trying to teach people the difference :D

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :How can you tell it's 1.3 billion ly away?  How can you tell the individual masses of the two black holes?  What characteristics of the signal do you use to tell?

Answer :The (slightly unsatisfactory, I'm sure) answer is, the shape of the signal. Our theorists run simulations that tell them what kind of waveform a particular event would produce, depending on the masses of the black holes, the distance, etc. These simulations are then compared to the data we took by our data analysts, which allows us to figure out what kind of event the wave we found came from. This is also covered in some detail in the papers accompanying the detection paper, which you can all find for download at http://papers.ligo.org for free - if you're really curious! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Hey, thanks for doing an AMA!

Anyways, my question is: how exactly does the detection process work?

Answer :Thanks for asking us questions! It'd be pretty boring if you didn't. 

The process is really complicated, so I'll simplify it a bit. But essentially, what happens is this: 

A gravitational wave travels through space. In doing so, it stretches and squashes the space it travels through slightly. 

It happens to travel through our solar system, including Earth. It passes straight through all matter, stretching and squashing all of it very slightly. 

It is also travelling through the LIGO detectors. The long detector arms get squashed and stretched slightly. However, we are looking for this! The output of the detector is usually dark, however as the wave is passing through the detector the arms are mismatched - they are of different length. As a result, some light comes out of the output port of the detector, which gets registered by a photodiode. 

It's not just one photodiode. The LIGO scientists are collecting data on over 1000 channels, and all of it gets fed into a computer system which runs a preliminary analysis on it. The computer recognises: This data looks an awful lot like what the humans told us would be interesting. The computer system sends an email to some humans. 

A few thousand kilometers away, in an office in Hannover, Germany, a scientist called Marco Drago gets a notification that he just got an email. It's an automated response from the computers analysing the data, telling him something interesting happened. This is not uncommon.

Marco opens the mail. He looks at the data. He's getting goosebumps. This is looking like it could be real. He hurries over to speak to his colleague, Andy Lundgren. 'Hey Andy', he says. 'This looks like it could be real.' He's speaking the words, but he can't quite believe it. 

Andy and Marco are now sending out mails to their colleagues in America, calling a few of them to wake them up. More people are gathered in Andy's office than he ever thought would fit in it. He's not gonna leave work today until past midnight. 

A few weeks later, people around the world are still not quite sure whether to believe their eyes. In disbelief, they open up the data file again and again. It looks too perfect! Even though the members of the LIGO Virgo Collaboration got the heads up about a possible detection shortly after the detection, it's difficult to grasp. Nobody expected data this nice, not this early.

A mailing list has been created to talk about the event. The scientists are certain this is real now. They are working on a paper to announce their discovery - and they know, this one will be in the history books. It'll have to be good. Every day sees another 50 mails being sent through the list, with the detection announcement paper going through 10 versions before it is ready for publication. This is a very stressful time, the scientists mustn't miss anything. 

Meanwhile, some people are spreading rumours about a detection at LIGO. This annoys the scientists - they will announce it as soon as they can, this kind of rumour is very counterproductive. 

Finally, a date is set - 11th February, 2016. The scientists are excited to share their discovery with the world after keeping it secret for so long. Finally, David Reitze steps in front of the mic at the press conference in Washington, D.C., and announces:

"We have detected Gravitational Waves. We did it!"

The rest is history. 


(So this took a bit of a life of its own - I hope you enjoyed reading it though! It was certainly fun to write. )

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Saludos. La onda gravitación al espacio tiempo, ¿còmo define al tiempo?

Question :Since gravitons are particle, does this discovery disprove the theory of gravitons?

Answer :no. this is not related. DS

Question :GW are not blocked by anything but can you cancel a GW with a corresponding GW with the same magnitude and frequency but traveling in the opposite direction?

Answer :Yes. Sort of. This would be like noise cancellation. It works at some specific point, but amplifies somewhere else. DS

Question :What is next?

Answer :Improving the detector, so we can see a lot more of them. Hopefully, this will allow us to learn a lot more about the sources. DS

Question :Hello! I recently read that the LIGO is operated by scientists from MIT, Caltech, and many other colleges and universities. I was wondering what role (if any) did the students of these academic institutions play in this discovery? 

Answer :There are extremely important. We had like ~70 grad students working at Hanford alone, since we started. We counted up to 60 undergrads before we gave up. A lot of graduate students have made essential contributions to make the detectors work and to process the data. DS

Question :Do gravitational waves suggest the possibility of the existence of gravitons due to particle/wave duality?

Besides astronomical observation, what technologies can we expect to develop based on this new knowledge over the next few decades?

Answer :No

Most of the technology development has to do with precision measurement.

Question :Do these waves have the potential to shove celestial objects like ort cloud objects, planets, or moons? 

Now that you have proven them on a macro scale, can this lead to new ways of energy harnessing or manipilation?

Could a spacecraft ride a gravity wave?

Answer :The ones that arrived at Earth are too weak to do anything that spectacular. DS

Question :1. How do we know the redshift of the source that produced these gravitational waves? Do gravitational waves themselves experience cosmological redshift?

2. How can we be sure this indeed the pattern of two inspiraling black holes, and not just instead a seismic feature (felt by both sites) that has, remarkably, the same vibrational signature?

Answer :I'm not an expert, but we discussed this among the responders here earlier. We're fairly certain that gravitational waves experience cosmological redshift, but no other kind of redshift. The information about the source was found by comparing the waveform to simulations we did of similar events, from which we know how to deduce source information from the shape of the wave. 

Question :How much of this discovery, if any at all, was based on timing? Did you get lucky that these waves reached us at the time we were observing, or could this exact same signal be detected years from now?

Answer :There was certainly a little bit of luck involved with the timing of this *specific* event (in so far as we didn't have to wait very long after turning the detector back on). But we expect to observe events like this *relatively* frequently. Something like "a few" to "a few hundred" per year once LIGO reaches its peak sensitivity.

So while we won't see gravitational waves this *specific* source again, we expect to see many more sources *like* it in the years to come.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :Congratulations! I read that the first detection of the waves was observed soon after you began the LIGO project itself. Must've been tough to wait on announcing until everything was clear!
I have two questions, but they are related: Why is no matter affected by gravitational waves passing through it- even if just time and light are affected, how does that not affect matter which is affected by light and time, and is there any substance the waves cannot pass through?

Answer :Thanks! It wasn't easy to hold still - especially since my office mate isn't in the collaboration, so I couldn't talk about it, print out any of the papers... it wasn't easy :D but we managed in the end!

Gravitational waves are embedded in spacetime itself - matter and light exist in spacetime, so when a wave passes through them they also stretch slightly along with the spacetime, but they are not directly affected. It's a bit tough to understand, I'm afraid. However, given that spacetime extends everywhere where our physics is meaningful, as far as we know gravitational waves are not held up by anything. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :How close are we to a theory of quantum gravity ?

Answer :Dude, I wish I knew. But even if we had one, I'm not sure I would be able to understand it. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Help me understand this, as the gravity waves are generated, from where does the energy come from that  can suddenly eclipse the amount of power of all the stars of the universe put together by such a staggering amount?  

Answer :For a brief time. If I take a Joule of energy and emit it in one millionth of second than that's equivalent for that brief instant to one million watts.

Question :> 3 solar masses worth of energy radiated away in the form of gravitational waves!

Mass can be converted to gravitational waves?
First time I'm heading such a thing... 
Could you please explain what's happening?

Answer :Gravitational waves carry out energy from the system. Mass is converted into energy (electromagnetic waves) all the time. It is what makes the Sun shine. As the first step in the p-p cycle 2 protons fuse to form a diproton (2,2He) and a gamma ray (EM wave), i.e. the diproton is "lighter" than the sum of the masses of the 2 protons - the difference is exactly the energy of the gamma ray via E=mc^2 


Question :How still relative to each other are the interferometers' mirrors, and how much of a problem does the uncertainty principle pose in your measurements?

How is the announcement affecting Einstein@Home participation?

What other types of radiation can be produced by black hole mergers?

Is there a live feed where we can listen in on detector output?

The universal gravitational constant is one of the least-precisely-known fundamental constants.  Can these observations be used to pin it down more accurately?

Answer :At the moment we are only limited by quantum physics at higher frequencies. Eventually, this may also be true at lower frequencies. In the mid band it will be thermal noise. 

Einstein@home looks for periodic sources like the wobble of a single neutron star. This analysis is ongoing and heavily relies on home users. Keep on participating! Sign up here http://einstein.phys.uwm.edu/

If there is no matter around the black holes, this is it.

No (not yet), but we have a public data release where you can get the data for the current event. https://losc.ligo.org/events/GW150914/

No, we are not going to give a better value for G. 

DS

Question :I once heard that gravity was the last piece  of a puzzle that is yet to be understood. Is this the piece you need to solve the theory of everything? If so how quickly and how much will this discovery change our world?  New technology? A better more detailed map of the known and unknown universe?

Answer :Everything we observed can be explained by general relativity. No new physics required. DS

Question :Have you seen any other events so far?

Answer :We analyzed 16 days of coincidence data. We have more data which we still analyzing and won't say anything in public until we are done. DS

Question :Why... does any of this matter? Or I guess, why does this matter to me and what does this mean for the future?

Question :Why can't we think, it is not gravitational wave, its speed of light not constant? that is what dark matter trying define.....?

Answer :We saw the merger of two black holes. This requires general relativity. DS

Question :Can LIGO detect dark matter?

Answer :No. DS

Question :My teacher said something about using different types of gravity waves to cancer each other out and create antigravity.

Is this accurate? Keep in mind he is a biology teacher

Answer :I don't think so. In any case, we are not able to produce any measurable gravitational waves on our own. DS

Question :Thank you so much guys for doing this AMA. I have to confess, I am 28 years old and I just can't grasp the concept of how you went from laser and mirror to black holes colliding. I understand what it is and its significance, but how could you tell the gravitational waves came from two blackholes colliding?  

Answer :Thank you for asking us questions! I'm not sure to what extent I can help you with your understanding, but you might enjoy an answer I wrote a bit earlier [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czyqq4g). As for how we can tell the source from the signal, our theorists have run many simulations about the kind of waves a certain type of event would produce. By comparing the data we measured to the data we simulated, we can imply what kind of event we observed.

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Is there a future for LISA? Why or why not?

Answer :Yes, definitely! It is now called [eLISA](https://www.elisascience.org/) (e for “evolved”) and the European Space Agency has selected it as one of three high-profile missions in the Cosmic Vision programme. The launch date is planned for 2034, so we still have to be a bit patient. There are many people worldwide that are working very dedicatedly on making this mission possible. Right now the [LISA Pathfinder](https://lisapathfinder.org/) spacecraft is at the Sun-Earth Lagrangian point 1 to test out crucial technologies for the eLISA mission.

— ES, PhD student, GEO 600

Question :I still don't understand, why is it significant to find these waves?

Question :What's  the significance about GW? Why is this such  a huge discovery? How can this knowledge benefit us and what will this mean to our future in physics?

Question :In what ways (if any) could the direct detection of gravitational waves be used to detect extraterrestrial life?

Answer :None that I know of. DS

Question :This is such an amazing feat but i would just like to know, how does this differ from using normal telescopes to detect events like this?

Also, from what I understand, GW travel at the speed of light as well, so how would using them change the way we view the observable universe?


Thank you so much for doing this and congratulations on having all your hard work finally paying off!


Answer :Gravitational waves are produced by moving masses. EM waves are produced by a moving electric charges, which involves matter. EM waves are also readily absorbed by other matter. 

Black holes are pure energy, so you have a hard time to detect them electromagnetically. You either have to look for matter falling into a black hole, or a star orbiting around a dark heavy object such as the NH in the center of the galaxy. 

A black hole merger may not emit any EM waves at all. So you need to listen to them with gravitational waves. DS

Question :Who from LIGO Wa exactly if I may ask? 

Answer :All our posts are signed by the author of that specific post. Some of us put their full name, some put their initials. But if you know someone at the site, you'd probably recognise them from the initials. You could also work it out by comparing it with the author list in the detection paper, which is available for free at http://papers.ligo.org. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :How are you able to determine the age, distance, and size of the collision from the signal? Wouldn't some of the collision's characteristics require more than one data point, in the same way that a single telescope picture of an asteroid can't tell you both size and distance?

Answer :1. What if you had 2 pictures [2 detectors!]?
2. What if you knew how you expect it to look like, so you already generated many pictures [and voila, it looks just like one of those!]?

A: The initial and final mass(es) are encoded in the matched template which we compare to the observed waveform. The correct & perfectly matching template tells us about these parameters [I: Magnitude of the observed signal is a measure of mass (=energy) lost in the merger as well as the distance of the merger from us; II: The frequency chirp - combined with the expected strength of GW signal at event horizon of final BH - is a measure of individual masses of the progenitor BHs] [Take a look at the 'Parameter Estimation' paper!]

B: Most of the energy seems to be radiated away entirely in GWs; we did not see any Electro-magentic counterpart signals with our Fermi/IceCube collaborators.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut



Question :I have so many questions burning in my head. Did some die diligence by scrolling down, so I hope these werd not already posed:
 
* How were you able to deduce the distance + size of the event? As I understand it, triangulation doesn't work at these distances.
* What will the next generation of "gravitation observatories" look like?
* How realistic is The chance of observing events from the early universe: i.e. beyond the range of electro magnetic radiation?

Answer :1. The exact shape of the signal tells us a lot about the source and by matching this to general relativity simulations, we can calculate how strong the gravitational wave must have been at its origin. By then comparing that to the signal amplitude we detected here on earth, we can deduce how far the wave travelled to reach us.
2. The next generation of ground-based GW observatories will probably be even bigger. The proposed [Einstein Telescope](http://www.et-gw.eu/) is planned to consist of a total of six interferometers with 10km-long arms, deep underground. There are also radically different plans for detecting gravitational waves in the future, like the [eLISA](https://www.elisascience.org/) space mission. But eLISA will be sensitive in a different frequency band and looking for other kinds of sources, so ground-based interferometric detectors won’t become obsolete any time soon.
3. I’m not an expert here, but I think that with ground-based detectors like LIGO it will probably not be possible to measure anything from the time before the universe became transparent. This is because in LIGO’s sensitive frequency band (which is roughly the audio band) signals from the early universe might be masked by other stronger GW signals of the many sources much closer to us. If we get lucky, [BICEP3](https://www.cfa.harvard.edu/CMB/bicep3/) will be able to tell us something about the effects of gravitational waves from the beginning of the universe.

— ES, PhD student, GEO 600

Question :A question from my mate Louis down the pub. We're calling this a gravitational "wave", and as such can it be characterized like a water wave? Do they expend their energy as they move, or do they keep going until the edge of the universe? If so what happens to them then - do they dissipate into whatever is next, or do they bounce back into our universe?

Bear in mind we were 5 pints deep by this point and came up with all manner of bollocks to explain it - so a professional pointer is probably needed.

Answer :Gravitational waves hardly interact with the matter they encounter while traveling through the universe, so they loose only very, very little energy. Still their amplitude goes down with distance from the source, because the power gets spread over a larger and larger area.

As far as we know there is no edge of the universe to bounce back from. So the gravitational waves will probably keep going until they are just some extremely faint background rumbling of spacetime.

Glad to see that this topic is interesting enough to make it past the fifth pint. :)

— ES, PhD student, GEO 600

Question :How did you determine the 29+/- and 36+/- masses? I'm especially curious how you know the 3+/- and the 62+/- energy and mass values after the event.

I'm not sure if I'm asking more of an orbital mechanics question, a black hole and gravitational wave question, or a general relativity question.

I know that the mass of two orbiting bodies and their distance determines their orbital period and I know about the Schwarzschild radius but I'm not sure how far those ideas go toward understanding an answer to my question.

Answer :Generally, people have done a lot of simulations on how black holes with different masses would interact in a binary system and what kind of waves we would get from them. By comparing our recorded data with these simulations, we can deduce a lot of information about the event - the masses of the black holes, for example. 

As for the resulting black hole, I assume we look at the ringdown - the small high-frequency downchirp after the merger. Looking at that, we can tell what mass the resulting black hole has, and the difference between that and the two original black holes must have been radiated away as gravitational waves. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Stupid question here. How do we know that the results were not from something on earth. Like seismic waves. Mini earthquakes or the tiny movement of the Earth's core, tectonic plates. Since LIGO is so sensitive, can't that be what we are seeing? Not doubting your discovery, just wondering.  

Answer :Disclaimer, I am not a LIGO scientisit, but I have read their report, available here:  https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/system/media_files/binaries/306/original/ligo-press-kit.pdf

What it states is that there are two detector sites, one in the state of Washington and one in Louisiana.  The signal was observed at both sites almost at the same time (with a delay of 7 milliseconds), thus ruling out local events which would have been isolated to only one site or had a time separation of more than 10 milliseconds (the light travel time between the two GW detectors).  However, you're right that seismic waves can and are observed by both detectors, and could possibly arrive almost simultaneously if the source was equidistant from both detectors) but such seismic waves are also observed by instruments specifically designed to detect seismic response, and reportedly, those effects have thus been accounted for within the datasets.

Question :LIGO_Astrophysics: Is one of the MIT LIGO grad students going to captain our softball team this year?

Question :I read that you have made what sounds to be a fairly precise estimate of the sun-masses of each of the two merging black holes - 29 & 36 sun masses respectively I believe. If the gravitational waves you detected are the net result of a single collision event, how were you able to determine the individual masses of the holes prior to collision from just the one signal?

 

Answer :I answered a similar question [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czyroup). Hope that helps! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :What equations do you use to calculate the gravitational waves strength?

Answer :Linearised Einstein's Field Equations, for an approximate result to the first-order.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Three questions:

1) Regarding the blind injections, these are mentioned numerous times in the impressions section of the interviews with scientists (in press kit), however searching the PDF paper (version 12), there does not seem to be any mention of blind injections. Why is this not discussed in the paper? Is another term used to describe this?
Is it not possible that someone, perhaps someone unauthorized and undetected, accessed the injection system and artificially created the appearance of this event? While of course it is important to have injections as a test, it seems a bit strange that the only way to know if an injection was done is to ask a human if they made the injection or not, and that this cannot be determined independently by any other records. In other words, is there no other electronic recording of when a blind injection is made? If not, how do we know it wasn't actually a blind injection, perhaps triggered by a hacker or someone else outside of the team that was supposed to have the only access?

2) Second question: since light follows the curvature of spacetime, as in gravitational lensing, why would the laser light in the interferometer not be affected by a gravity wave in the same way as the physical distance between the mirrors? At a basic conceptual level, it seems that the Michelson-Morley experiment assumes that length of matter is contracted and expanded, but EMR is not. But since EMR also follows the curve of space time as in gravitational lensing, why isn't EMR also contracted and expanded by a gravitational wave?

3) Since the two interferometers H1 and L1 are on the surface of the curved earth, that means the orientation of the plane containing the two perpendicular laser beams must be different, right? Therefore one would expect that if a single signal was observed by each of these two differently aligned detectors would be at different amplitudes, right? In other words one of them would be closer to alignment with the distortion caused by the wave, and the other one would be less, because it's not in the same exact orientation. Yet when the two signals presented at the press conference (and in the paper) are overlaid together it seems like they lined up almost exactly. Was that pre corrected for amplitude? Also did the authors consider that the relative amplitudes could also be used for further narrowing the statistical probability for the direction of the source?

Answer :Let me try to answer at least your first question:

We are sure beyond any reasonable doubt that this was not an injection. This is for example stated in [this companion paper](https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500238/public/main) (and the technical notes referenced there).

The important thing you need to know is that all injection (blind or unblind) are of course recorded on quite a few of the hundreds of thousands of channels that we keep track of. What makes blind injections blind is simply that we are not allowed to look at those channels initially. So, making sure that there was no such injection at the time of the detection was quite simple.

Even the possibility of a malicious injection by some “hacker” was extensively studied in the months after the event. The result is that this would have been impossible to do without leaving traces. All digital channels are recorded and the data is saved in various places. Spoofing the data would have required changing a huge number of channels in all these places to keep them consistent. An injection bypassing the digital system and somehow directly shaking the mirrors would still have shown up differently from a real GW signal in various control channels. We, as the whole collaboration, wouldn’t have been able to fake this signal, let alone doing it in secret and getting it right on the first try.

— ES, PhD student, GEO 600

Question :How do you know for sure that the wave you measured came from this specific event? In other words, I think I understand how you measured the wave, but how do you measure the distance and direction it traveled in?

Also, was it just one wave that you measured, or are there more ripples behind it?

Finally, does the instrument have other functions or does it just sit there, for years, waiting for a random wave to hit it?

Thanks for taking the time to answer our questions.

Answer :The first part of your question has been answered elsewhere as well, but in summary we compare the data we collected with simulations we made of black holes colliding using Einstein's GR field equations. By this comparison we can deduce a lot of information about the source. The direction we get by comparing the signals measured by the two detectors, which are slightly different due to being apart and also differently orientated. This allows us to do some triangulation - however, we're really looking forward to Virgo coming online so we can measure the source location more accurately!

The signal we measured looked like [this](https://losc.ligo.org/s/events/GW150914/P1500229/fig10.png), and it probably existed a bit before that - but we only measured it in the frequency range that we are sensitive to, which is 35 to 250Hz. 

The LIGO detectors are used to detect gravitational waves only - they are too specialised as instruments to be used for any other general purpose. However, of course many scientists do their research at the sites, receive training or test out their equipment, so these sites are research labs as well as observatories. And observatories they are - now that we have made a detection, we can call ourselves gravitational wave astronomers and use the waves to explore the universe! And we don't have to wait years either - we're estimating that a binary systems merger happens somewhere in the universe every 15 minutes, and we'll see between 5 and 50 events per year. We'll have some more precise numbers on that once we've made some more observations! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :I'd like to know how the gravitational wave actually interacts with the laser, if at all, and how the interference is actually detectable, if the gravitational wave stretches/compresses spacetime (and everything in it) 

One train of thought posits that when a gravitational wave passes through the beam, does the beam extend/compress with the spacetime around it (akin to a sine wave on a rubber band being stretched/compressed)? If so, from the frame of reference of the beam (or part of it) nothing is happening since its own strain matches that of the spacetime it is within. Similarly, from the frame of reference of the beam splitter, this extension of spacetime would mean that the beam returns in the same time as if there were no gravitational wave passing by IF the speed of the beam (and hencec) remained the same from both frames of reference. But this doesn't seem to work in my head. i.e, if the speed of the beam remains the same from it's own reference point, then from an external point of view a strain extension caused by a gravitational wave would cause the beam to exceed c since it is traveling further but in the same time (even if only 10^-23m further). From the beam RF (reference frame) it's still traveling at c, from the outside reference frame, it's not. Similarly, if it was a compression of spacetime, the beam would slow down from the outside reference point since it's traveled a minutely smaller distance. 

Unless c remains the same regardless of the strain from the outside RF, in which case from the beam RF it has changed speed. 

In either of these instances, it seem to me that the beam contained in one arm will be a different wavelength to the beam contained in the other arm, which would introduce some sort of interference (since the arms are orientated in an L shape, one beam would compress, the other would extend, assuming the gravitational wave was the correct orientation). 

It's also occurred to me recently that time dilation may factor in somewhere, but I haven't figured out a lot to do with that.


I'm very sorry if it's incoherent gibberish, I don't claim to be remotely educated enough to begin to understand, but it does interest me greatly.



Answer :I hope I understood your question correctly - let me know if I didn't! 

It's important to note that the speed of light is always c, in all reference frames and absolutely - it's a very strict speed limit! So the light will always travel at that speed. And the light will also be stretched and squashed by the gravitational waves - this stretch corresponds to a slight difference in wavelength. But with a strain of 10^-20, the wavelength changes by 10^-27m - that's immeasurably tiny! We can only measure the 10^-20 strain over the distance of several kilometers, so the strain of the laser light is completely irrelevant. Even with the stabilised laser source there are much larger fluctuations going on all the time. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :If this is the first time we have detected gravitational forces, how are you able to accurately determine size, location, and categorization of said event?  
It would seem that over 1 billion years, gravitational forces from a multitude of celestial bodies and events would have an impact on the event that was seen. How can one determine the event is not a combination of multiple events?  
How much of an affect does Earth's gravitational forces have on the event? If we were able to setup two facilities on opposites sides of the earth(or even offset for rotation) and were lucky enough to catch an event head on, what would the differences in the observations be?  
Also is there something to be said about the validity of an experiment that uses said equations to prove those equations? I  understand there are two locations, but wouldn't an additional location need to be some where else far away in space to determine credibility. Earth seems smaller then a pinpoint compared to to an event with a circumference of 10,053,100,000 light years. Much less 3000 km compared to 9.510967e+22 km.


Question :Since general relativity says that gravity is the result of distortions in space-time from massive objects, are gravitational wave's affected or changed at all as they pass through existing gravitational fields, such as Earths?  ...wouldn't the gravitational waves be distorted by the time they reach the detectors?

Answer :The space between the source and us is mostly empty. If a gravitational wave encounters a massive object gravitational lensing could happen. This is the same as for light. DS

Question :How does gravitational waves help in seeing 'through'  dark matter? 

Answer :GWs do not interact/couple strongly with matter [gravitons have a very small interaction cross-section], or - as far as we understand - the dark component of the universe. They go right through them! Thus, they are not scattered or diluted on their way to us.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :As I understood it, there are two cilinders through which you send light at the same time and more or less compare the time at which they arrive back at the source.


My question is, do the cilinders actually -- physically -- change their length when the gravitational wave passes through them? Does that imply, that theoretically, if a huge' gravitational wave passes through me'and my surroundings, I would see everything around me change, including myself? 

Answer :No. We are embedded in space-time. The space-time ripples/waves/moves around and everything that is embedded in it, moves with it. We are not physically able to distinguish this movement since in our frame of reference, everything moves along with us. It is like telling how fast a car is moving while sitting inside the car and not being able to look outside or see the speedometer. There is no way to tell the difference unless we are able to compare it to another frame of reference [This is also the test set-up behind Equivalence Principles in GR]. But then, you may ask, how does LIGO manage to do it? The answer is light. No matter what happens to space-time, the speed of light in it [i.e. in all inertial frames of reference] remains at 'c'. It doesn't 'contract' or 'expand' with the space-time fabric. This allows us to smartly decouple the motion and detect these GWs.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What's your favourite all time set?

Oh, LIGO, not LEGO... Never mind



Answer :We already answered that yesterday! Search 'LEGO'.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :(How) do you think this will affect the Standard Model, beyond the obvious of "gravitational waves: they're a thing not a theory"? From what very very little I think I understand I'm pretty sure it shows that gravitrons (is that the word? the gravity particle, like gluons are to strong interaction) exist, but I'm no physicist.

Answer :Very wonderful question, and I appreciate your curiosity about complicated subject. This discovery can not be treated as direct evidence for Graviton detection. As we don't know how exactly gravity behaves and atomic scale, we have to make guesses about its behaviour. The careful analysis of the data showed, if the Graviton models are correct, its mass cannot be larger than 10^-55 gram ( 0.0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000001 gram). So yes we are improving our understanding of Standard model in gravitational regime.

-Akshat Singhal (Coauthor of Gravitational wave detection paper in PRL https://goo.gl/MTkF4E )


Question :The LIGO team played the "sound" of the event, so it seems that the frequency of the signal was well within the audible range of human hearing (20 hz to 20 kHz).  Also it was mentioned that much lower frequency signals might be detectable in the future by much larger experiments.   But wouldn't it be much easier and less expensive to look for *higher* frequency gravity waves (say, in the Mega-Hertz range)?  Wouldn't a detector looking for such high frequencies gravity waves be able to be significantly smaller than LIGO?   E.g, on a table-top?  Are there theoretically any events that could produce gravity waves at such high frequencies? 

Answer :We are looking for higher frequency ranges e.g. with GEO600, which searches in the kHz region. But the truth is, we're not sure what kind of source would generate gravitational radiation at the MHz level, and even so we probalby wouldn't be able to build a tabletop detector due to the space taken up by all the isolation equipment to shield the detector. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Could I please get a simplified explanation of all the stabilising, dampening, and noise reduction systems you have in place?

Answer :The seismic isolation system is based on pendulums. You can do the experiment yourself! Take a beer bottle and hang it from a twine, maybe a yard long. Now hold it at the top and move your hand left to right very slowly and repeatedly. The bottle will follow. Now move a lot faster and the bottle will more or less stay in place. DS

Question :Detecting gravitational waves must be very difficult. How did you guys come up with a plan to detect them? 

Answer :There is some historical context at the beginning of our main paper http://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. DS

Question :As per a previous response from LIGO, there is currently no good theory or evidence for quantum gravity or gravitons, so gravity waves are not thought to be particles but rather "ripples in the fabric of space-time."   If that's true, that how is this "space-time fabric" different than the "aether"?  

Since gravity waves do not need a particle to exist, and can be modelled as a wave in space-time, why can't this same concept also be applied to EMR (light, radio, etc) such that it is also modelled as wave (albeit a longitudinal wave rather than transverse) within space-time, just at higher frequencies lower amplitudes than GW150914?




Answer :The aether was a concept about a fixed reference frame in the Universe. This does not exist.

You can model EM radiation as transverse waves of the electric field. EM radiation directly interacts with an electric charges. The "charge" for gravity is mass. We know photons exists because we can see their quantum nature with experiments. No such effect has ever been observed with gravity. DS

Question :Congratulations on your discovery and confirmation of Einstein's calculations!  How did it feel to see the evidence?  Also, I heard that you had converted the waves to an audible form.  Are there plans to release a sample for all to hear?  If you've already done so, where can I listen to it?  Thank you!

Answer :The audio clips are right at the start (and at the end) of this video: https://youtu.be/FXlg3cr-q44

Question :Hello LIGO, do these waves have any effect on time? Is it measurable? Could they interfere with precisely timed apparatus like gps satellites? 

Answer :The atomic clocks on GPS satellites to run faster than on Earth due to the difference in gravity.  However, the gravitational waves we detected were too weak to have a measurable effect on GPS. DS

Question :I remember that the detectors had to have a revamp recently, because they were picking up rumblings from trains etc. With the new system, how do you avoid picking up changes caused by earth-based events  - seismic waves etc.? (Also, congrats!)

Answer :Advanced LIGO spend a lot of time and effort to design and make better seismic isolation systems. Maybe too technical, but lots of details here https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500237/public/main DS

Question :Two questions: 

1.) Someone in this thread said that "Gravitational waves just interact so weakly with matter that even though they carry a lot of energy, the energy just goes right through everything", but gravity itself interacts strongly with matter over great distances (planetary orbits around the Sun, me not able to jump very high off the surface of Earth).  Can you please explain the difference?

2.) (Best guess) knowing what you know about the accelerating nature of human knowledge and technology, how soon before we can manipulate gravity (and how soon before a real hover board)?

Answer :Gravity requires a lot of mass or energy to be strong. The gravitational waves emitted by the BH merger were very strong at the source. However, here on Earth we are very far away and the energy that reached us is puny compared to the mass of the sun.
Not sure about anti-gravity. DS

Question :How much could a gravitational wave be distorted due to interaction with other ripples or distortions in space-time? I.e. Wave-wave interaction or wave-well encounter etc.

Answer :They are affected [by means of interference] just like any other EM/mechanical wave would be affected. They are lensed by massive objects [i.e. deep potential wells] too! The strength of such an interaction will depend - obviously - on the strength(s)/phase(s) of individual components. But the idea is the same as in the case of any other wave interaction [in non-QM terms at least!]. In Quantum Gravity terms, we still have to figure out how gravitons interact with each other. They do not interact/couple strongly with matter; but we are not sure about self/mutual interactions.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Do Gravitational Waves get weaker over time/distance?

Answer :Yes, they decay with distance/time. Their sources/progenitors also appear larger with distance/time [attributable to uncertainties in measurements to some extent]. 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How can you be so sure that the waves come from the merge of two black holes? 

Answer :The observed signal(s) match perfectly with the expected theoretical signal(s) for a Black hole binary pair. [It's all in the paper]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I have no idea if this AMA is still going, but I really do hope it is. I'm currently in the last few months of the equivalent of highschool here in Denmark, and I've been quite interested in gravitational waves since I read Kip Thorne's book on Einstein's legacy. What, if any, advice could you give me regarding pursuing a career in gravitational wave astronomy? Thanks in advance! :)

Answer :Where in Denmark? If you are close enough to the German border, we often organise tours to our facilities in Hannover [It is one of the centres of GW Astronomy]. You can check those out. In general, take Physics in college and you are on the right track. :D

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How were the black holes able to lose so much mass so quickly? Doesn't it mean that it "escaped" from the singularity? 

Or is it fine because it doesn't carry any information from within?

Answer :1. Your second intuition is correct. GWs are not information from within; they are rather waves which flow outward from the event-horizon.

2. As far as losing mass is concerned, it was a very violent merger. The BHs have severe distortions around each other in space-time and the merger resets these distortions. It is natural that a huge amount of energy is released. A better question would be that why are the GWs so tiny even though so much energy released; the answer to that lies in the 'tensile strength' of the space-time fabric. The space-time fabric is extremely extremely stiff and it takes a tremendous amount of energy to generate ripples in it [much like the case of trying to generate waves on a frozen lake!].

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut 

Question :How do you feel when after you made a breakthrough scientific discovery, you see that a far right, close minded bigot is one front runner running for the American presidency?

Answer :I can only express my own personal opinion here: I usually use Trump to humour myself. He has been a good source for a laughter on stressful days! God bless him and God bless America!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Which came first, the chicken? Or the egg?

Answer :The duck. The duck is always the answer.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Can you detect which direction the signal came from?

Answer :Good question! We need more than 1 detector to narrow down the location. If you look at the papers [Parameter estimation paper], you will see that the uncertainty region is very high [since we only have 2 working detectors!]. Once we have more of them [Virgo + KAGRA + LIGO-India], we can triangulate the sky position more precisely. Not only that, it also helps us to make stronger claims on polarisation(s) of signal(s) [the current working detectors are almost aligned with each other and this doesn't help us in making remarks on polarisation(s) of signal(s)]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Is it possible that gravity waves, or a similar effect, could be the cause of the universe expanding?

Answer :I doubt that. The expansion is attributed to remnants of Inflationary epoch. GWs are tiny messengers at best. At the same time [on 'a similar effect'], we know so little to make such a massive deduction. We can only speculate what this 'similar effect' could be.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :This comment has been overwritten in response to Reddit's new privacy policy, which took effect 1/1/2016.   

   This policy sells any and all Reddit comments to advertisers. Reddit's owners don't deserve to get rich off your personal information!   

   If you would like to delete your comments, add the browser extension [GreaseMonkey](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-us/firefox/addon/greasemonkey/) to Firefox and add [this open source script](https://greasyfork.org/en/scripts/10380-reddit-overwrite).   

 Then simply click on your username on Reddit, go to the comments tab, and hit the new OVERWRITE button at the top.

Answer :Low-level answer: No, light speed is not affected and remains constant at 'c'. This is exactly what allows us to decouple the motion of the arms!

Mid-level answer: The energy is not lost! It is all converted into GWs. The space-time fabric is very very very stiff [i.e. very high tensile strength]. It took ~3 Solar masses to create enough energy to generate such tiny ripples in an extremely stiff fabric!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Hi LIGO! Great work! What would the next phases of more an even more sensitive LIGO be? And what limitations do we know about to taking more sensitive readings? 

Answer :Thank you!! We are improving our detectors even now! The next steps are to go to a higher laser power, which will increase our sensitivity at higher frequencies. We're also working on increasing our lower frequency sensitivity by investigating some noises in that frequency region. These upgrades should be done this year, and soon we will also be joined by the Advanced Virgo detector, which will add another very sensitive detector! These improvements will help us see more events, and quieter events. Beyond that, in the future we'll be introducing squeezing which will help us with quantum noise, and we're already discussing and planning what further advancements will come in the next LIGO generation. --MW, PhD student at LSU and LLO

Question :If gravitational waves carry the force of gravity, what does your discovery say about the hypothetical properties of the graviton?

P.S.: Congratulations on your discovery, and thanks for the AMA!

Answer :Our discovery is explained by general relativity alone. We did set an upper limit on the graviton mass, so.

Question :First of all, congratulations on this historic breakthrough! 

We have learned how to generate, use and control electromagnetic waves to transmit information such as voice and data - do you foresee any similar application for GW?

Answer :See our response to a similar question [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czymjm4)

Question :I was under the assumption that if one were to remove the moon in an instant,  there would be no delay in  it affecting its gravitational pull on earth. Now I'm reading in some articles that gravitation moves at the speed of light. Which is the case? 

Answer :The latter.

If the Sun suddenly disappeared, for example, we would only start moving tangential to our current orbit at the same moment we see the Sun wink out.

Question :How could you apply these discoveries to learning more about dark energy and dark matter?

Answer :We can't really say much about the dark-component [Dark matter + Dark energy]. To our current knowledge, GWs interact/couple very weakly [if at all!] with matter/dark-component. [There are some speculative theories where the dark-component can be avoided altogether by assigning graviton a tiny non-zero mass; that is too speculative to make a comment about!]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How much money do you make? 

Answer :Not enough.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What is the fractional frequency instability of the laser used? I'm wondering because let's say the length of one interferometer arm changes fractionally by say 10^-20 due to a GW, then you need the phase noise of the laser to be lower than that by quite a bit to get decent SNR. Certainly it cannot be higher, and afaik even the record for laser stability is still a few orders of magnitude away. Do you get away with it because the frequency of the GW is quite low and it's easier to suppress the phase noise at low freqs?

Answer :I am not an instrumentalist, so I can answer it only in part. 

1. You are right about lower phase-noise since GW(s) frequencies are usually toward the lower end of the range [~10-500 Hz]. At high frequencies, the noise floor is completely dominated by Shot noise [Photon counting statistics] from the Laser source. At low frequencies, the Radiation pressure noise [back-action noise on mirrors] dominates [this doesn't make much difference at very low frequencies since Seismic noise overtakes the Radiation pressure noise]. We used a new method of 'squeezed light' [developed in AEI, Hannover] to suppress the [Quantum-]noise from the Laser source. You should give this a look: https://www.physics.umass.edu/sites/physics/files/admupld/Mavalvala_QuantumLargeScales_Colloq_3Mar10.pdf

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :so when will we be able to measure gravitational waves again? i mean 2 black holes merging arent that common right?

Answer :Now that we have discovered the first one we are confident that we will see others. We are still working to make the detectors more sensitive, which means we will search a larger volume of the universe. Then it is just a matter of observing and waiting for signals. We expect to see several for every year of observation, and as our sensitivity goes up that number will increase too. (BO'R)

Question :If I'm understanding this correctly the process of measuring the gravity waves involves the deflection of a laser, right? But that has to be a super super super tiny amount of deflection, so how on earth can you measure it reliably?

Answer :It isn't actually the deflection of a laser. It is the difference in time that light takes to travel down one arm of the interferometer versus the time it takes to travel down the other arm (which is at right angles to the first arm). We have built instruments where we can keep this time difference fixed to very high precision. The GW then disturbs that arrangement and we see that change. (BO'R)

Question :Can gravity waves interact with each other? (Amplify or cancel?) If so, do you have any thoughts about exploring ways to deliberately exploit this? 

Answer :Gravitational waves do interfere like any other waves. This could confuse our detector, if it would happen often enough. I don't see how we can exploit this, so. DS

Question :It always bothered me (because I'm dumb) that the speed of light is considered to be constant but we know it can slow down and travel at different speeds in different situations through different materials, etc.

How is it still a constant?

Answer :The correct phrasing is more like: The speed of light is constant in all inertial frames.

Without going to deep into the gory details, what this means is that if you measure the speed of light from some source you get the same answer no matter how fast you are moving yourself. Think of it this way: If you stand by the highway and a car are passes you at 100 km/h your measuring device will read 100 km/h. But if you are on the highway traveling beside that car you will measure its speed relative to you as zero. Light doesn't work that way. No matter how fast you are moving towards or away, the speed of light will always be the same. The reason we don't notice the effect in everyday life is that the speed of light is about 1,000,000,000 km/hr.

When light propagates through a material (air, water, glass), it does go slower. But that's ok, it doesn't conflict with the theory of relativity. The speed of light in a vacuum is still constant.

Question :How are you able to see the merger of the black holes billions of light years away?

Answer :By building a really awesome detector ;-)
If you are into technobabble, read the paper here https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500237/public/main DS

Question :Do we know what affects these gravitational waves would have on earth if say we had only been a couple of million light years away from the event?

Answer :They would certainly be stronger. The strength of signal(s) goes inversely proportional to the distance to the source [1/D_source]. You can work the math and see what factor do you get; it should be roughly 1,000 times stronger. But that is still quite low at a strain magnitude of 1.0e-18; so no scary earth-jiggling affects!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What effect do these waves have on our perception of time?

Answer :None. We had already made up our minds about time being a yet another dimension a long time ago. I'd say, about 100 years ago!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :So as I understand it:

It is as if we got another sense for exploring space. Up until now, we only had sight (detecting EM waves of different lengths). With this, it is as if we got another sense (ie. hearing). Correct?

Can we improve this "hearing" or are there some limitations we can't get over? Will we be able to detect more with time? Or with better "resolution"?

Answer :Yes, it is like a whole new sense and we are all excited about the new discoveries it will bring! 

Thank you!! We are improving our detectors even now! The next steps are to go to a higher laser power, which will increase our sensitivity at higher frequencies. We're also working on increasing our lower frequency sensitivity by investigating some noises in that frequency region. These upgrades should be done this year, and soon we will also be joined by the Advanced Virgo detector, which will add another very sensitive detector! These improvements will help us see more events, and quieter events. And with the addition of more detectors, we will be able to better resolve the sky position of events! Beyond that, in the future we'll be introducing squeezing which will help us with quantum noise, and we're already discussing and planning what further advancements will come in the next LIGO generation. --MW, PhD student at LSU and LLO

Question :Hello and thank you so much for being so gracious to spend time with us in Reddit-land. 

I will preface my question with saying that I have only a very rudimentary grasp of quantum physics, but am fascinated with the discipline....

anyway, I am wondering if, when two black holes merge, does the ratio in size of the orginal black holes have any impact on the gravitational emission?  Also, is there any theoretical limit as to how many different black holes might be involved in one merge?

again, thank you :)

Answer :yes, we can get the individual masses from the merger waveforms. When one partner is much larger than the other the waveform will terminate earlier. 
There is no theoretical limit how many black holes you can merge. Very very very unlikely to happen at the same time with more than two. One the other hand, it could happen in series and this way you can make larger and larger black holes. DS

Question :I missed the AMA. But I have two questions:

1) How did you figure out the original masses of the two black holes before they collided and the final mass of the merged black hole?

2) Is there any other trace left by this massive event besides the gravitational wave that you just detected?

edit: congratulations for the discovery!

Answer :1. The initial and final mass(es) are encoded in the matched template which we compare to the observed waveform. The correct [or say, best matching] template tells us about these parameters [I: Magnitude of the observed signal is a measure of mass (=energy) lost in the merger as well as the distance of the merger from us; II: The frequency 'chirp' - combined with the expected strength of GW signal at event horizon of the final BH - is a measure of individual masses of the progenitor BHs] [Take a look at the 'Parameter Estimation' paper!]

2. Most of the energy seems to be radiated away entirely [or, majorly] in GWs; we did not see any Electro-magentic/Neutrino counterpart signals with our Fermi/IceCube collaborators. 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What was the first step in obtaining and observing such an incredible event? Was LIGO attempting to discover these waves, or was it by mere chance?

Answer :Of course, we were. For 25 years!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Can these gravitational waves effect things like the butterfly effect, effects things?

Question :What if you didn't start searching for the signal until September 14th *2016*? Would we have missed our chance to see this? 

Answer :We wouldn't have seen that event, but we would have seen another one. If we had started a year earlier, we would have had a different first event as well! It doesn't really matter which we find first, but we're very happy with GW150914 as our initial signal :) 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Hey. Thank you for your time. As a layman I didn't even know about LIGO and It has been fascinating to follow LIGO's enterprise news in the last two days.


I've been reading a lot about the finding but there is one think that i struggle to grasp:


 how do you know that these gravitational waves detected is due merging of two black holes and not something else?

Answer :1. Instrumentalists' perspective: We had to be careful, of course, in ruling out other possibilities. One of the other option(s) was a 'Blind Injection' [Blind Injections: We insert fake signals into our detectors sometimes. Only a handful of people (I believe 3 is the number) in the executive committee know about such an injection. It is meant to be a test for the search pipelines.] It was double-checked if it wasn't a blind injection after the signal was picked by our first low-latency cWB search pipeline. The next thing to do was to rule out malicious intent by someone [if someone injected a fake signal without authorisation]. There was a good amount of sherlock-ing going around to rule those possibilities out. We had to get into the mind of the criminal [:D] and see what possible ways there were to make a malicious injection. We didn't find any evidence of that either after two months of rigorous work [lead by Matt Evans at MIT].

2. Astrophysicists' perspective: The waveform we saw is only possible from binary Black-hole mergers. No other astrophysical process can cause such a 'chirp'.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Too many questions for one person to answer! My colleagues in US are dead asleep, still!!! :'D

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What does it feel like knowing you have left behind a mark that likely lives as long as humanity itself?

Answer :It's cool, to be honest. But one can only look ahead and hope to make bigger discoveries. This is only the beginning.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Sorry for my shaky science but is this discovery also proves the existence of hypothetical Graviton ?

Answer :No. But we did put estimates on the mass and Compton wavelength of the graviton [if it existed!]. This discovery, by itself, entails no reason to believe in graviton(s), or otherwise.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I understand that you detected the wave quickly after turning on the machine after some upgrades. Given that, is it likely these things happen all the time? Have you been measuring since and have you measured anything else? 

Answer :~0.5-1 per month for BH-BH mergers. We have more data but are still analyzing it. DS

Question :First, congratulations! 

What will this discovery mean for the future of the field of astrophysics?

And also, because the signal was detected a few months ago, how did you guys check to make sure what you detected was gravitational waves?

Answer :Thank you!

If you listened to the press conference on Thursday, you probably heard the phrase "opening a new window on the universe" several times. Astronomy until now has all been using observations of electromagnetic radiation, but gravitational waves are completely different! It is hard to know what the future will bring, but there will certainly be new information and surprises from this new way of looking at the universe. Specifically, observations like this will tell us more about black holes, which can't be observed electromagnetically!

One of the strongest confirmations that it is a gravitational wave is the fact that it was seen in both detectors (in Louisiana and Washington) in the same way that we would expect a gravitational wave to affect them, with the right separation in time and matching signals. 

Even so, we have been very careful to rule out noise sources. Our searches saw this signal within a few minutes of its arrival, so we have actually been spending the past few months doing a lot of checks to make sure that it wasn't some kind of environmental noise or glitch in our detectors. We couldn't find any noise that would create that signal! 

--MW, PhD student at LSU and LLO


Question :Hello, more often than not I see great intellectual achievements or finding like this go right over the heads of most of the public, the significance or importance is usually lost on them. With what I have heard been called "the greatest astrophysics event of the last century" (or something along those lines), do you have any plans to educate the masses?

Answer :We consider it very important to explain our findings to the public, and it's why we have this AMA! 

Even before this discovery, we have been working hard on education and outreach to explain our work in terms that other people can understand. For most of our major publications, we have written summaries in less technical language so people can read about what we do: http://www.ligo.org/science/outreach.php

We also have a fantastic science education center, which hosts school tours, teacher training workshops, and provides hands-on interactive demonstrations to teach students of all ages about the science we do at LIGO. https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/LA/page/Science-Education-Center

You can also find explanations, videos, games, and more resources from our website http://ligo.org/

--MW, PhD student at LSU

Question :What practical technology will this hopefully lead to in the future?
For example, some sort of deep space scanner that can detect exoplanets more effectively or something like that? 

Question :Super late to this party but I have a question I don't think has been asked yet.

If you wanted to observe an object (say a binary black hole system), how would you 'aim' the detectors? It's very intuitive with visible light, how does it work with gravitational waves?

Answer :We don't aim them. We let the GWs hit us. Since we don't have an 'aperture' in strict terms [we do have variable sensitivity in sky!], we can point our detectors in any direction and measure GWs [unless we are very very unlucky & the polarisation of GWs turn out to be anti-parallel to our detector :P]. This is also why we want to have multiple misaligned detectors [we currently have 2; we will have Virgo + KAGRA + LIGO-India soon in future], so that if one is less sensitive to a certain sky-position, the other can compensate for such a loss! 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How do you guys measure and differentiate Gravity waves and other sources like IR heat wave wouldn't they show up also? For the science fiction in me are these gravity waves from the black holes massive enough to cause time quakes as they pass by? What do they do to life on planets?

Answer :One of the reasons it took so long was to make sure we had a real event and not something environmental. We have a lot of sensors to monitor the environment and to make sure it isn't local. We wrote an entire paper about this https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500238/public/main.

Gravitational waves interact very weakly with matter. They just pass straight through planets. This is one of the reasons they are so hard to measure! DS

Question :Hey,

How often are there events that you are currently able to detect?

Follow up, how long were you wait for such an event?



Answer :1. We expect roughly ~0.5-1 per month. But we still haven't fully analysed the date after October. 

2. 25 years since the start of LIGO project in 1992!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :So now that you all have proven we can detect GWs, what happens with experiments like Bicep and their search for evidence of primordial gws? Will your observations make it easier to determine what exactly we are looking for when trying to find evidence of them?

Answer :Biceps measures at a much much lower frequency and their apparatus is quite different. The two LIGO observatories can look for the primordial background in gravitational waves directly by cross-correlation. But again, this would be at a completely different frequency and unless you assume some exotic models we are probably not sensitive enough. DS

Question :Could this open the possibility of time travel?

Answer :No. Please don't get your hopes up. We can 'see' back in time, not so much travel. :D

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Hi, 

I'm interested in the statistics behind what the expected waiting time is for a detection event you observed. I would imagine the arrival of gravitational waves with robust signal-to-noise ratios would follow some Poisson-like process. If that were the case, did physicists have a strong prior regarding the expected waiting time to a real detection before building LIGO in the first place (to justify funding)? 

Also, can you quantify how "lucky" we were to observe this event (i.e, how far ahead/behind schedule are we)?

Thanks!

Answer :Yes, these events happen randomly from our point of view. ~0.5-1 per month for BH-BH mergers has been mentioned by others. We never had any guaranteed sources. The only well established rate estimate comes from binary neutron stars, because we have seen some of them in radio. Still the uncertainty is an order of magnitude. Advanced LIGO at full sensitivity will have a very good chance to see these. Black hole signatures are much stronger and we can see them much farther out, but we had no evidence until now that they even existed.

Supernovae are well known in optical and we know their rate. However, we don't really know how much gravitational waves they emit. Maybe, if we get one in our own galaxy.

I waited 20+ years for this event. DS

Question :Now that gravitational waves have been discovered, what is the next step? How can this benefit us? What kind of technology can be created in the future? Can this discovery somehow help human race in creating sophisticated space machines or probably a time machine? 

Answer :Sadly, no time machine.

Question :Congratulations on your discovery. Do you think one day the technology would exist to detect gravitational waves of objects of smaller mass? If yes, how far in the future do you expect that to be?

Answer :We typically like to think in sensitivity. Smaller objects will generate a weaker gravitational wave, so they have to be closer for us to hear them. For LIGO it also has to be fairly fast with an orbital frequency of at least ~10 Hz. The space based interferometers such as LISA will be able to hear white stars in close binary orbits in our galaxy. DS

Question :As this is the first observation of two black holes merging I am curious what we theorize is occurring beyond the event horizon. Is it just two extremely dense objects smashing together or is the mystery beyond the event horizon something far more than we can describe in our understanding of a 3 dimensional universe especially considering we can never actually retrieve information from beyond that threshold. 

I find it amazing that these bodies are essentially a 3d hole. Do the normal laws of physics even apply inside?

Question :Don't know if your still going but here goes. What does this mean for me? Will it have any impact on the common mans life? Thanks.

Answer :We're here all weekend! It's impossible to tell, really - we can observe the universe in totally novel ways, and there's no knowing what we will find. We've also had to develop an incredible amount of new technologies, and improve upon existing ones, to make our detectors sensitive enough for this discovery. These developments are now available for the world to innovate upon and use to improve your life in the future! 

Justus S, PhD student in high energy laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Can gravitational waves be used as a form of communication across space? Idk let's say somehow a message is encoded on a wave as it passes, hitching a ride along with the wave, therefore it can travel across the universe to communicate with other galaxies? Possibly even extraterrestrial life?

Answer :In the same way we can (and regularly do) pass information along with electromagnetic waves, there's nothing stopping you from modulating gravitational waves to send a message. The problem comes from just how hard it is to control the sources you'd need to do so. To send a radio signal, for example, we wiggle electrons back and forth in an antenna. This is convenient because electrons are pretty easy to move around fast enough to generate signals that are very strong. 

But in order to generate *gravitational waves* strong enough to be detectable after traveling an appreciable distance across space, you'd have to wiggle *extremely* massive objects (like black holes, neutron stars, or what have you) at very high speeds -- which is much, *much* harder than moving electrons around!!

Suffice to say that even for a preposterously advanced civilization, sending communications across space with gravitational waves is impractical at best. But I'm loathe to ever say anything is truly *impossible*.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :The response to this discovery has been overwhelmingly positive excitement from the public, in slight contrast to the LHC which experienced its stops and starts and was more public about it's process along the way. Who made the decision to keep the discovery under wraps until the PRL was published? What do you attribute the difference in the public's general attitude to? 

Answer :The history of the two fields is rather different. There were multiple premature claims of detecting gravitational waves in the past. As a collaboration we long ago decided that we would only talk about it, if we are really really sure. DS

Question :Ok, you say that energy was released as gravitational waves; I can't recall (fairly novice here) if there are other phenomena that shed energy without doing so through the matter/motion of matter or the release of photons when dropping quantum energy states. Do we see the fabric of spacetime being affected by energy like this often (I'm guessing that the answer is no, considering that seems like what LIGO is built to do)? Are there more ways to transfer energy than those I've mentioned? 

Answer :This is the first time we have seen the fabric of spacetime being dynamically "shaken" by gravitational waves. Of course studies of binary pulsars (notably by Taylor and Weisberg), showed us that the orbit was decaying by emission of gravitational waves. There's also many excellent astronomical photographs of "gravitational lensing" taken by Hubble for example. These clearly show how mass is warping space so that light itself is bent. (BO'R) 

Question :How could we "make" these gravitational waves artificially ? Could it be used as a propelling in theory ?
What do you think would be the possible applications ?
I mean everything but to observe the universe.

Thanks a lot! You're amazing and the answers really interesting and informative.

Answer :Well we "make" gravitational waves all the time, but they are so weak that we could never hope to see them. For detectable signals LIGO had to look out into the universe for massive objects (black holes and neutron stars), that were moving at close to the speed of light and colliding together. It seems inconceivable  that we will be able to mimic that sort of event anytime soon. (BO'R)

Question :What exactly is a gravitational wave? I'm a high school student and I only know about transverse and longitudinal waves! 

Answer :A gravitational wave is a wave in space, stretching and squeezing the space between objects as it travels. It is like a transverse wave, because it's causing the stretching and squeezing in the directions transverse to the direction of travel. For example, if you imagine a gravitational wave hitting your screen, it would move masses kind of like this: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:GravitationalWave_PlusPolarization.gif

Or if you prefer a cool 3D visualization, you can see this illustration of a gravitational wave traveling down this mesh tube:
http://www.universetoday.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/gw-waves-wave.gif

There are a lot more videos, explanations, and games if you want to explore our webpage: http://ligo.org/

Good luck in school! --MW, PhD student at LSU

Question :With two detectors, you only have a "Arc" of detection probablity.

Is there a search wtih Radio Telescopes or Visible EM Telescopes looking for the source of the event?

Answer :Very good question!

Yes, with only 2 detectors, our sky-position estimates have high uncertainties. This gets better with increasing number of detectors. We do have an extensive EM-followup program where we immediately send triggers to EM telescopes & other counterparts [Fermi, IceCube etc] for EM followups. We estimate the followup region in sky to the best possible range with our low-latency pipelines [such as cWB], and send the alert to EM & companions to observe specifically in that sky-patch. Fermi released its followup report yesterday; they saw something but we are yet to establish if it was significant. [Fermi report: http://gammaray.nsstc.nasa.gov/gbm/publications/preprints/gbm_ligo_preprint.pdf]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How were you guys able to tell that this event occurred from the collision of two black holes a billion years ago? This seems insane to me. Is it an educated guess? Does the data fit some "black hole colliding" model? Great AMA thank you for your time. 

Answer :The waveform we see matches the predicted waveform you get from solving the General Relativity equations for a Black Hole - Black Hole merger. The amplitude tells us approximately how far away it is (in the same way as a light bulb is fainter far away, so too does the "brightness" of the GW source decrease with distance). So the data does fit a model, the model comes from Einstein's theory. You can see the paper itself and companion papers that explain more at:

https://papers.ligo.org

Don't be scared to look at the paper. It is quite technical, but the figures make it very clear by eye how well the signals we see match the predictions from calculations. Figure 1 for example shows how numerical relativity produces an answer that matches what we see. Numerical relativity is what we call the process of using supercomputers to solve Einstein's General Theory of Relativity. (BO'R)

Question :You've detected 2 black holes hitting each other.

How often do you expect such events to happen?

Gamma Ray Bursts happen quite often...  
What sort of frequency do you expect with this phenomena?


Answer :~0.5-1 per month for BH-BH mergers.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Do you think that gravitational waves can be used to see passed the CMB? Are there models which predict what might be seen?

Answer :Can you please rephrase your question; I didn't quite understand it?

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Hi there LIGO! Incredible work! 

My question is; Will your findings affect our hunt for dark matter and if so, how? 

Answer :Thanks a lot! We appreciate your support!

No. GWs do not interact/couple strongly with matter, or dark-component of universe. This is good and bad at the same time: good, because they do not get diluted/scattered on their way to us by the stuff that lies between us and the source; bad, simply because we can't make judgements on dark-component of the universe.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What was the time resolution of the data you collected at both Livingston and Hanford?
How did you localise it to just the one banana-shaped area?

Answer :[Edited]

1. I am not sure of that technical detail; maybe one of the instrumentalists could tell you more about the sampling rate of the time-series output at photodetectors. [I believe it is of the order of microsecond or less]. The time separation between two H1 and L1 detectors is ~7 ms, so it must be quite lower than that!

2. The banana-shaped localisation is done by:

A. On a simpler level, having more than 1 detector can help us triangulate the source better in sky simply by taking into account the time-difference between multiple detectors [~7ms in this case between H1 and L1]. It's similar to how bats use echolocation; we can't have GW echoes, so we decided to have more than 1 'ear'. Obviously, more 'ears' the better!

B: Taking into account the differential sensitivities of our detectors to the GW-modes w.r.t sky-positions [due to different orientation of detector(s) w.r.t signal(s); we call them 'Antenna Pattern Functions' and they are different for H1 and L1]. The detected signal is modulated [in amplitude] by these radiation pattern functions at each detector, and they help us deduce the sky-location to a better [i.e. more accurate] extent by taking into account the affects on polarisation(s). [I am uncertain if this was used in GW150914 localisation though; the H1 and L1 detectors are almost aligned with each other]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Hello LIGO Crew and congratulations! Here are my questions:

1. Are gravitational waves simple waveforms (i.e. sine wave), or complex waveforms?  Theoretically if we were close enough, would the gravitational waves be audible?

2. What does this breakthrough mean for science as we move forward? What is now possible with this technology that we were unable to do prior?

Answer :Gravitational waves are not like you probably imagine a wave - they are quadrupole waves. [Here's a gif of what that looks like.](http://www.universetoday.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/gw-waves-wave.gif) However, even if they were really powerful (e.g. if the event was as far away from us as the sun), I don't think we would be able to hear them - the analogy of 'hearing the universe' doesn't go that far :D But we can observe much more of the universe now than we could before - we're no longer limited to observing objects that emit some kind of electronmagnetic radiation. So it's a pretty big step in terms of astronomy! 

Justus S, PhD student in high energy laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Hi Ligo,
 Is there any possibility that Dark Energy could actually be gravitation waves/Gravitons?

Answer :According to some theories, yes! A tiny mass imparted to graviton(s) can cause such an affect, where one doesn't need dark-component to reconcile with the Cosmological constant. But that's more speculation than anything else; it is not fruitful to make comments on that. 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut


Question :Is the term "gravitational waves" only used for waves of a certain magnitude, or would it be correct to say that any object that moves creates gravitational waves?

Answer :Good question!

Any object with a 'time-varying mass quadrupole moment' can emit GWs. If you - a human - start rotating in your chair in circles [or start dancing!], you 'may' emit GWs too! You may now ask the reason behind 'may'; there is a small limitation on such small-scale emission(s): an object can emit GW(s) only if it has 'enough' time-variation in its 'mass quadrupole moment' to emit at least 1 graviton. This is simply quantum mechanics applied to GW(s)! 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Not sure if this will get through, but can LIGO detect two colliding galaxies?

Answer :When galaxies collide, we expect that the black holes in their centers will form a binary and eventually merge--just like the system which produced GW150914.  Except: These black holes are much, much bigger!  The black holes we saw in September have masses about 30 times that of the sun.  That sounds big, but the black holes in the centers of galaxies have masses millions to billions times the mass of the sun!  As a result, the gravitational waves emitted when they merge will be at a lower frequency than LIGO can ever detect.  These waves will instead be detected by either the future eLISA detector in space (for the million solar mass black holes) or the timing of radio pulsars by collaborations like NANOGrav (http://nanograv.org/, for the billion solar mass black holes).  -RL, postdoc, UW-Milwaukee

Question :What are the potential applications of this discovery guys?  Science-wise?

Answer :In one word - massive. You may have heard the analogy that we're able to listen to the universe for the first time - I think that's a pretty good one! So far, astronomers only had electromagnetic radiation to work with. That's radio waves, gamma rays, microwaves, visible light, infrared - it's all nice and good, but there is so much out there that doesn't emit radiation, and we had no way of observing it so far. 

But everything in the universe is subject to gravity. So at least hypothetically, everythign can be measured with gravitational wave astronomy! You may have heard that something like 80% of the universe is dark matter (don't quote me on that number), which has so far been unobservable... because it's dark. But it's also massive. There is no telling what we may even discover with this new way of observing the universe, that's how big this discovery is. And that's not even to mention all the applications other people might find for the technology we have developed along the way. But we're mostly excited to be able to call ourselves astronomers now! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Now that gravitational waves have been confirmed, is it possible to solve the issue of singularity through series bessel equation solutions or Ramanujam's theorems?
edit:
and What does this find mean for the multiverse theory?

Answer :While Einstein's theory of General Relativity predicts a singularity deep inside a black hole, effects of such a singularity would have to travel faster than light to get out of the black hole. We are of course outside the black hole and cannot receive any information from the inside. Because of this, gravitational waves can only tell us about the masses and spins of the black hole and the distance, orientation, and position on the sky of the system with respect to us. 

Question :[removed]

Answer :We can't pinpoint the source with just two detectors. What we can do is point to an area of the sky where the source is expected to lie. That area is currently quite large (approx. 600 square degrees). We can also estimate the distance to the source from the amplitude of the GWs, but again the errors on that number are quite large. As more detectors worldwide come online we expect to be able to vastly improve our ability to constrain the position in the sky.

The masses of the black holes are determined from the waveform that we see. There's a quantity called the Chirp Mass (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chirp_mass), which can be calculated from the frequency of the waves we see and how fast that frequency is changing as the black holes merge. The detection paper actually has a simplified discussion of this in Section II. The precise determination of the component masses is part of a companion paper (see "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914" at https://papers.ligo.org). This paper is quite technical though. (BO'R)

Question :It feels like every couple of years there is a headline in the news about someone finally proving something Einstein theorised way back when. I'm curious to know how many more are there? With this taken care of, what would be the biggest science headline to look forward to that includes the words "scientists prove another Einstein theory?"

Answer :I don't know that I can give a definitive answer to that question. What I can say is that we have found Gravitational Waves as predicted by General Relativity. Now we can investigate how gravity works in the strong field. We have just begun to test General Relativity, so while nothing we see is at variance with what that theory predicts, there's still work to be done to show that Einstein's theory is complete and needs no modification. (BO'R)

Question :What do I need to join up?

Answer :It's awesome that you're interested! There are a lot of different paths that people have taken to join LIGO, so it depends on what you want to do and where you are in your education. 

I first joined through a summer undergraduate research experience, and then chose to continue on in graduate school in physics. If you're interested in that route, you can look for schools that are member institutions of the LIGO scientific collaboration (LSC): https://my.ligo.org/census.php 

Or if you don't want to dedicate your career to LIGO but want to help out a search for gravitational waves, you can check out the Einstein@Home project, which uses your computer time to look for signals from spinning neutron stars! http://www.einsteinathome.org/

You can read more about joining the LSC here: http://ligo.org/about/join.php

--MW, PhD student at LSU

Question :So there has been speculation that due to gravitational waves, we will eventually be able to explore past the Dark Age. This is obviously because they interact with matter so little. If that is the case, should we not be seeing gravitational waves caused by the Big Bang?
Also, a theoretical question. What sort of events trigger gravitational waves with what period (seconds or below, minutes to hours, years to decades, and beyond)?

Answer :By the Dark Age I assume you mean the period after the Big Bang and before the first stars ignited. There is hope that eventually we will detect GWs from the first instants after the Big Bang, during the Inflationary period. But that signal is expected to be very faint and diffuse and will probably require more advanced detectors than we have now.

We see GWs from the final merger of a Black Hole (BH) binary. We expect to see events from mergers of BH and Neutron Stars(NS) and from NS-NS. These should all be in the frequency range of LIGO, with periods of less than a second. If you have more sensitive detectors at low frequencies (for example LISA or Pulsar Timing Arrays), then you can hope to see signals from massive black holes long before they merge. As they orbit each other they emit GWs and that is how the orbits decay and eventually merge. But the signals from that have very long periods, months to years. (BO'R)

Question :How do you use the 7 ms delay between the two signals, or some other characteristics, to estimate the 1.3 billion light-year distance to the source ?

Answer :The estimate of the distance to the source actually comes from the amplitude of the detected signal. In the same way that a light bulb gets dimmer the farther away it is, so too does a GW signal get dimmer with distance. Our measurement of the amplitude of GW150914 allowed us to say approximately how far away it is. But there are pretty large errors on that number, 410 +160 -180 Megaparsecs, which means that it could be as close as 230 Mpc or as far away as 590 Mpc. (A Megaparsec or Mpc is about 3.3 million light years). (BO'R)

Question :Congratulations on this terrific accomplishment!  What is known about the time frame for the merging of two black holes in relation to the emitted gravitational waves?  Are the waves emitted over long periods of time or relatively short periods of time (centuries? days? or minutes?)  Over the 18 days of detection in September, how many other signals (if any) were detected from other black hole mergers?  It seems more likely that you would have detected signals from mergers in progress than one in completion (where you heard the chirping stop), unless the waves are emitted only at the very end of the merger.

Answer :Binary systems constantly emit gravitational waves throughout their lifetimes! In fact, it is this steady flow of energy away from their systems that causes their orbits to slowly decay (like with the [Hulse-Taylor binary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PSR_B1913%2B16)), eventually leading to a merger (like the one we saw here with GW150914). But the gravitational waves aren't *strong* enough (and, importantly, they aren't at the correct frequency) to be detected by LIGO until the final moments before the merger. Before that, the signal is too weak (and too low frequency) to be in the LIGO search band.

So while we only *heard* a fraction of a second's worth of gravitational waves from this merger, the system itself had been slowly emitting gravitational waves for a *very* long time prior.

Regarding other signals -- as is mentioned in our "astrophysical implications" paper, there was another candidate that was not nearly as loud as this one. As a result we can't be *certain* that it was astrophysical in origin. 

But we're still analyzing data! We'll be able to say a lot more in the coming months. 

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :Hi LIGO, congrats for the success of the experiment, here's my question:
Which could be the practical applications of the gravitational waves?

Answer :Unfortunately, we don't know how to produce them in any measurable quantity. So at the moment all we can do is listen to the Universe! DS

Question :Was this done in space? because aren't we already inside of some kind of gravity well that has either collected the mass of Earth, or is caused by the mass of Earth? Would our own gravity influence the behavior of this wave, and would it be stronger without the influences of the Sun, Jupiter, and the Earth? The Sun's gravity field is pretty big, so would that divert, redirect, channel, or conduct these gravity waves?

Answer :The observatories are located at Hanford, Washington state, and Livingston, Louisiana. So, we are very much on Earth. Gravitational waves are getting bent by gravity exactly the same as light. It took a total eclipse and precise optical measurements to see this effect with stars very close to the sun. For Earth this effect is negligible. So yes, gravitational waves feel the gravity of suns and planets, but is a very small effect. DS

Question :Are there any designs for a gravitatuonal wave detector that uses slow light? 

Seems to me the length of the arms is huge because measuring the change time it takes the light can only be so good. But if the light was slower...

Answer :The only way we know how to slow down light is to add matter into the arms. We currently use an ultra high vacuum system just to make sure that we don't suffer from Rayleigh scattering (the same effect that makes the sky blue). Unfortunately, adding anything in the beam almost certainly adds noise and makes the sensitivity worse. making the vacuum tubes longer is probably far easier. There are people talking about using slow light to make a white light interferometer, but this is currently pure fiction at the sensitivity we would need. DS

Question :Does spacetime have a [Young's Modulus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young%27s_modulus)? If so, what is it?

I've often read that gravity is somewhat odd because it is so much weaker than the other forces. An alternative point of view seem to be that the Young's Modulus of spacetime is very high so it takes a huge amount of energy to deform spacetime.

Answer :You are bang on the money. Absolutely correct. Space-time fabric is indeed very rigid [or, 'stiff']!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I bought your raisins the day before (12 February 2016) at a dollar store near my house. When I opened the box, some of the raisins were yellow and slightly misshapen.

What are you planning to do about this?

Answer :We can call the raisin-angel for you and help you get your brains sorted out. [Kidding! :D]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut


Question :How well does the found signal match the predictions made by the 	theory of relativity? Is it a more or less a perfect fit, or are there any 'gaps' between the predictions and your observations that indicate that there might something else going on out there than just relativity?

Answer :These results agreed almost perfectly with the predictions of General Relativity! There were no appreciable deviations from the theory, and this was a "strong field" event! In that way, this is truly a triumph for GR. Though I would expect that, as we make more and more detections, we're bound to be surprised eventually!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :you're probably not still answering questions, but I'll post this anyway in case someone else can answer maybe.

What technological/scientific hurdles did you have to overcome to make this discovery?  In other words, if GW's were predicted by general relativity decades ago, why could they not be detected until now?

I know it's kind of an ambiguous question, not really sure how to narrow it down any further.  Thank you!

Answer :Time to update your priors, because we're still answering questions! (Sorry, a little bayesian non-humor there).

I'm sure my instrumental colleagues will have more to say on the matter, but there were *many* hurdles that had to be overcome in the 100 years since gravitational waves were first predicted. 

First, we had to convince ourselves that gravitational waves were real and not just some strange artifact of general relativity. This took almost 50 years! Even Einstein famously wrote a paper with an argument that gravitational waves were just an artificial byproduct of the theory.

But once we convinced ourselves, we had to then think about whether or not they were strong enough to ever be physically detectable. Gravity is extremely weak! A more than a Nonillion (1 followed by 30 zeroes) times weaker than electromagnetism! And so gravitational waves, which are *tiny* perturbations in gravity itself, are very hard to detect! Through the 1960s and 1970s, some proofs of concept were made, but we still knew very little about what to expect from gravitational wave sources. There was even a somewhat famous (in the field, anyway) false-detection claim in the late 1960s by Weber.

It turned into an engineering challenge as much as it was a theory challenge in the 1980s-1990s, when the first plans for LIGO were being drawn up. The sensitivity that would be required to detect gravitational waves is hard to wrap one's head around. Some of the technology that would eventually end up in LIGO didn't even exist yet! But by 2000 or so, they had managed enough advancements in optical coatings, suspension and seismic isolation, thermal control systems, etc, etc, etc to at least have a proof of concept instrument in operation.

It's a little known fact that initial LIGO really *was* a proof of concept. While it was on the fringes of being sensitive enough to detect gravitational waves, it wasn't *expected* to. It was just supposed to show that you *could* build a detector that approached those sensitivities. But it took almost 10 years to fully tune and calibrate the initial detector to its design sensitivity. 

Once that was done, the engineers had the tall task of doing it all over again! To actually detect gravitational waves, we had to turn everything up to 11! A new higher power laser meant the optical coating people had to figure out brand new ways to improve the mirrors so they wouldn't overheat. New optical control systems were put in to strengthen the laser and improve the bandwidth of the detector. And there were a hundred other improvements that our *extremely* talented group of instrumentalists have worked very hard to implement over the last five years.

And throughout all of this, our data analysts had to invent entirely new statistical methods for extracting weak signals from data. Theorists had to come up with compelling models so we knew what to look for. 

The detection of gravitational waves has been an achievement a *century* in the making, and hundreds -- or more accurately, thousands -- of people have contributed to make it a reality! 

Needless to say this is a monumental achievement for science, and the start of something truly extraordinary.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :Hi folks, first, AWESOME, second, have you seen this crackpot? 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srVlo1Ez5fk

LIGO can detect to a range of around 300Mpcs, yet this signal came from around 400Mpcs.
How was that possible?


Answer :The horizon distance depends on the source. 30 solar mass black holes we can see out to ~2Gpc.  So, this discovery is well closer in. 

We have a standard figure of merit which is based on the reach for neutron star binaries. This one was around 170 Mpc for the maximum observable distance. Not sure where the 300 Mpc comes from. DS

Question :Do black hole mergers release much energy in the electromagnetic spectrum, like neutron star mergers do?

Answer :Naively, you wouldn't expect them to. If the binary merger occurred in a region where there was a substantial amount of dust you might see something, and I suppose there could be effects akin to Hawking Raditation (that are above my pay grade as a lowly observational astronomer) which could contribute. But the black holes themselves are not likely to be charged, and so only interact gravitationally. 

But we'll learn more about this as our observing partners continue to follow up our events with electromagnetic observations!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :Is it conceivable to use gravitational wave interferometers to learn more about dark matter?

Answer :These interferometers are sensitive to space-time perturbation produced massive objects that are compact and move at significant speeds. But they don't distinguish between objects made of ordinary matter or any other type of matter. So in principle some of these objects could be made up of dark matter (but current theory is that dark matter don't clump similar to ordinary matter). However dark matter is expected to dictate how the compact objects of ordinary matter distributed throughout the universe and hence by mapping these compact sources we could tell the effects of dark matter on the evolution of the universe.
SK - postdoc, Olemiss/LLO

Question :How do you cooperate with GEO600? Are LIGO and GEO600 even rivalising projects (apparently not judging by what I have gathered reading through the thread)? Is GEO600 part of what looks like a network of GW detectors? If not, how are the goals of LIGO and GEO600 different from each other?

Answer :GEO 600 is actually a part of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration. GEO took part in the recent observation run (though it was temporarily down on the day of GW150914) and took science data for over 90% of the time. But due to its very limited sensitivty compared to the LIGOs it would have needed a lot of luck and an extraordinarily strong signal for GEO to detect something.

The now more important role of GEO is that of a technology test-best. Being a much smaller project, it can take some risks and is more flexible to quickly try new things. An example of a technique that has been developed at GEO and is now an important part of the advanced LIGO detectors is the so-called monolithic suspension: The entire last stage of the mirror pendulums for seismic isolation is basically made of one piece of glass, with the main mirror suspended from extremely thin glass fibres.

So, the collaboration between the detectors is very close and not at all rivalrous. There is a vivid exchange of knowledge, data and people.

— ES, PhD student, GEO 600, working with squeezed light

Question :Does the speed of a GW depend on the material its passing through, like the refractive index for light?

Answer :There are, in principle, such effects. However, it is so hard to get matter to respond to gravitational waves ---- for example, the extraordinary precision of an instrument like LIGO that can detect them, that index of refraction effects are not detectable.


Question :If you were to drop a dozen rocks in a pond, and then try to measure the waves that they generated, from my understanding, it is possible that the waves they generated could interfere with each other and alter the waveform that you would observe if you were standing at a different point in the pond.

Is it possible, although unlikely, that this analogy applies to gravitational waves, and that the waves that were observed are just this? 

Answer :We also look for such combination of many different signals. It is called stochastic gravitational wave background. Searching for gravitational wave signals is like hearing conversations in a crowded room. While we can hear the words of loud people, we would also hear a background noise from the mixing of words from many other people. The case of current binary black hole signal is like hearing the words from loud people which we can clearly understand (i.e, the signal has well defined shape). It is most likely that there exist a background of other fainter signals (the signal will look random). Along with the main analysis that studied the strong binary black hole signal, LIGO also looked for a background of such signals. That analysis didn't find any such background, but predicted that advanced LIGO might see such background with its final design configuration. You can read more about this analysis and results at,
http://www.ligo.org/science/Publication-GW150914Stoch/index.php

Question :Hello scientist, first if all congrats for your great work! My question is: Does the breaktroughs prove the graviton? P.S. Hopefully, the discovery results into a Nobel Prize! :)

Answer :Thanks for the nice words. The breakthrough does not prove the graviton. We do put a limit on the graviton mass from propagating waves, but that limit is much weaker than the best static limits. We are really looking at gravity in a classical sense (where General Relativity is now classical!). (BO'R)

Question :Could gravitational waves, if spaced correctly, go through constructive/destructive interference?

Answer :Yes, they can! In the exact same way as EM or Mechanical waves.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :So the passing gravitational wave causes a change in the metric, right? How does an interferometry then work, if both the space and time components are changing? 

I mean if the space components changing cause the length of the LIGO arms to change, doesn't the change in the time component cancel out the effect that you would measure because of the interferometry?

Answer :Your intuition of space-time is absolutely correct! However, we are decoupling the space-like distortions from time-like distortions here; in the end, we only measure the space-like distortions. Moreover, we are able to measure this distortion in space ONLY because the 'speed of light is constant in all inertial frames'! This leaves the Laser phase unadulterated by space-like distortions [when it bounces back and forth in the arms of the interferometer]. The constancy of speed of light is the holy grail that led us on to the path of salvation. :D

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How is the stretching of spacetime that the gravitational waves exhibit related to the gravity that is keeping me pulled against the earth?

Answer :The gravity keeping you "pulled" against the earth is also from the warping of spacetime. A good visual (not perfect, but no analogy is), is of a cannonball on a rubber sheet. The cannonball will make a big indentation in the sheet, the size of the indentation will depend on how massive the cannonball is and how stiff the rubber is. If you put a ball bearing on the sheet it will roll towards the cannonball. That's what the earth is doing to you, and what the sun is doing in the center of the solar system.

The waves we detected came from two black holes 30 times more massive than the sun (so 30 million times more massive than the earth). So they warp spacetime much more than the earth does. They also moved at a significant fraction of the speed of light. That's what it takes to make waves that we can detect with LIGO. Space is very stiff! (BO'R)

Question :Hi LIGO, congratulations on your discovery! My question, can you tell if the universe will continue to expand in the future?

Answer :Yep! Forever and ever again, to no end. It will get asymptotically slower but the net acceleration will always be > 0, howsoever small. [There are few who may disagree with this though...]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Do you believe the detector can be improved to the point of making detailed measurements as opposed to simply detecting the presence?

Answer :We are already making detailed measurements! We determined individual and final black hole masses at the 10% level. The distance measurement is currently limited by the fact that we only have two observatories. Once Virgo is online, we should get much better sky localization. We set a new constraint on the graviton mass. Once we hear more of them, we will also get an idea about population statistics. DS  

Question :How were the instruments suspended to stop interference from seismic activity and other variables? How you you prevent errors from the laser when you deal with such a small scale of variations? 

Answer :This is one of the experimental challenges.  We use actively controlled seismic platforms and quadruple pendulums to achieve the desired seismic attenuation. We put everything into vacuum to prevent acoustic couplings. Lots more details here https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500237/public/main. Our laser is extremely well stabilized and we monitor its frequency and intensity very precisely. True the laser could glitch, but we would notice it. DS

Question :I know it was recorded at two different sites, and matched expectations. But how can we attribute it to gravitational waves when the results were unexpected? 

If we have other means of observing the event, I would be less inquisitive. But did we know that there might be two black holes colliding that would possibly produce the outcome? 

If we reverse the analysis, and assume the inverse is true, that is that it was caused by something else, what would that mean? Would there be a bunch of theories, that we know to be correct, conflicting with it?

Right now we know there is something that moved two unique points of observation in an almost identical manner, in an expected way and with an expected variation. But if there is any other way this could be explained, even if we don't know it exists yet, that does not contradict the rest of the currently known theories, would they not need to be considered first? 

In a universe that has nearly infinite possibilities, one that has what was thought of as rare (the collision of two black holes) happening often enough to be seen in an almost infinitely small window of opportunity, it is simply difficult to attribute it to gravitational waves no matter how infinitely small the chance is that it was caused by something else. Unless there is no other explanation, no matter how unlikely, I stand on the side of "found evidence of what *might* be gravitational waves" and not "observed" them.

So, I would simply reiterate my question - how do we know that there is nothing else this could be? Or do we simply not have the ability, and given all the data, this is just the most likely, meaning no confirmation - only support for the hypothesis. What if this *is* something else? Does it break our currently accepted model of the universe? 

Answer :Imagine a scenario. You go into a public toilet and come back. You realise that you don't have your favourite pen anymore in your pant-pockets. Maybe you dropped in the toilet somehow? You go back and find a pen that looks just like yours! Brand-new and all that!

If you find what you are looking for, e.g. your pen in this case, do you take it as yours? Or, do you go around wondering if someone else may have lost the exact same pen at the exact same spot sometime before, and you just dropped/lost your own somewhere else, or didn't have it in the first place? It is totally within the realms of possibilities that it could be someone else's pen, if you think about it. Do you say 'I found my pen!' or 'I may have found found my pen...!'?

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Don't you think it's funny to call these gravitational waves when we don't really even truly know what gravity is!? Really, gravity is just a convenient word we use to describe this phenomenon of attraction. Even Einstein didn't believe in "gravity " in the traditional method because the math is not applicable the same way for large and small interactions. I'd agree there was an important discovery made but it seems like associating this with "gravity " only takes away from the gravity of the discovery!

Answer :Einstein's theory of general relativity is a rigorous mathematical framework that was used early on to explain the bending of light and the advance of the perihelion of Mercury. It also predicated black holes and it can be used to calculate what will happen when to black holes merge. This is exactly what we saw. Sure, people wonder, if there is something even deeper than general relativity, but this is not needed to explain what we observed. DS

Question :So about the Fermi observation. 

Our models predict that an sGRB is the signature of a neutron star merger - why would there be an electromagnetic counterpart to a stellar massed black hole merger? 

If this GRB was produced by the same merger as GW150914, does this tell us something about the dynamics of accretion disks around BH binaries? 

Also, who's the lucky graduate student who gets to try and simulate this?

Answer :1. We don't know that yet. [Our best bet is, obviously, on thick accretion disk(s) around one [or both] of the Blackholes. [It is not expected that stellar blackhole(s) would possess such emissive accretion disk(s) though...]

2. Point 1 answers Question 2.

3. I believe someone at Caltech[?]. Or, at AEI-Potsdam[?]. I would also imagine some Dutch people[?] within LIGO interested on this subject.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How do we benefit exactly from this knowledge in everyday life situations? How can we, as humanity, apply this now and use it?

Answer :We are going to use gravitational waves to study the universe in the same way we have been using visible light for thousands of years and radio waves, X-rays, gamma rays, etc. for a shorter time.  We will learn more about things we know a little about, learn the first things about objects we have predicted but haven't been able to see (like this binary black hole), and hopefully encounter many surprises!  

Our research has also led to development in optics technology and data analysis techniques, which can be used in other fields.  LIGO has also educated many students and postdocs.  Some stay in the field, but others go off to use their mathematical and physical knowledge in other fields.

From my perspective, though, it is my first point which matters most: the continual advancement of human knowledge.  I think it's amazing that as a species, we've moved from discovering simple things like how to make fire all the way to both predicting and detecting these tiny, invisible ripples from billions of light years away!  -RL, postdoc, UW-Milwaukee

Question :So I understand that the LIGO detector is best attuned to a certain frequency range of gravitational waves.  It looks like the planned eLISA will be attuned to lower frequencies, and the EPTA project to even lower frequencies.  Can you explain the basic reasons that these different detectors have bandwidths that are centered at different frequencies?  Is arm length a major factor, like antenna lengths are for EM waves?

Answer :The optimal antenna length for gravitational wave is a quarter wavelength, exactly like in EM. And also like in EM you can spool up the antenna. In LIGO we send the photons back and forth in each arm about 100 times. The limitation on Earth arise from background noise at low frequencies. Advanced LIGO is designed to measure from 10Hz and up. You don't have this limitation in space, so you can go to lower frequencies (and yes use longer arms). EPTA uses the timing of pulsars to measure the space in between us and the pulsar. So the antenna length is extremely long and optimal at very very low frequencies. DS

Question :Congratulations on your discovery!  And for all your hard work!

Must be a terrific amount of "noise" from the environment (i.e. events on the planet, in the solar system, etc.)  How do you filter all that out?

Answer :Thanks for the interest in the discovery. As you mentioned, there are many noise sources that could affect the instrument, at least at the level we are trying to measure. One of the dominant noise source is ground motion. The ground is always vibrating for many reasons: earthquakes, people moving, ocean waves hitting the continent etc.. Even though we don't feel it, it is huge for the instrument. One way we reduce this motion is to use suspended mirrors. Similar to suspensions in the cars that reduce vibration from the ground, LIGO uses suspended mirrors. Not one stage but four stages of suspension. It also uses active controls to cancel out the ground motion coupling to the mirrors (like moving the mirrors such that it counteracts the ground motion). Also most of the LIGO is made up of tubes and chambers of high-vacuum to avoid air molecules moving the mirrors. Think of LIGO mirrors as most stationary objects on the earth! On top of these we have many sensors that monitor ground motion, magnetic fields, temperature variations, acoustic signals, RF signals so that we can distinguish between actual gravitational wave signals and signals that mimic gravitational waves that are caused by environmental effects. Below is a paper that describes how the detector works 
https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500237/public/main
and a paper that describes how we remove artefacts due to environmental effects,
https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500238/public/main
SK - postdoc, Olemiss/LLO

Question :Since GW's are waves in the spacetime itself how fast do they travel? We know that things can not travel through space faster than the speed of light, but from dark energy we pretty much understand that spacetime itself might do whatever the hell it wants to including not giving a shit about the speed limit.

So how fast do GW's propagate through spacetime itself?

Answer :According to Einstein they travel at the speed of light. DS

Question :It sounds like computer simulations of black hole mergers under a wide variety of possible conditions were run using Einstein's general relativity equations in order to generate a set of expected waveforms. Then the two waveforms (Louisiana and Washington) from event GW150914 were matched up to the expected waveforms in order to determine the masses and locations of the black holes. In terms of this being considered further confirmation of Einstein's equations, how can we be sure that the equations aren't off? If Einstein's concept of curved space-time was right, but the quantities given by his equations weren't quite correct, LIGO analysts could still have found a match in the set of expected waveforms, assuming that they were generated by incrementally covering a large range of possibilities. If I think f(x) = 2x, then I give 1,2,3, and 4 as input, I get as output 2,4,6, and 8. If the actual function turns out to be f(x) = 4x, then when I see an output of 8 I would incorrectly conclude that the input was 4 when really it was 2.

Is there some way that LIGO has actually confirmed Einstein's equations that is just too complicated for me to see at first glance as a layperson? Or is the confirmation of general relativity just conceptual here?

Answer :You can never completely confirm a physical theory--you can only find evidence which supports it (or something which contradicts it!).  For example, Newton's theory of gravitation was "confirmed" over and over until suddenly we found something it couldn't explain--the orbit of Mercury.

So for now, we can say that GW150914 matches the predictions of general relativity extremely well!  But we can do better in the future.  First, we can develop more theoretical alternatives to test against.  And second, we can continue to improve the detectors so that the signals we detect are even stronger, thus allowing us to do more stringent tests.

Ultimately, though, we can never fully "confirm" general relativity or any scientific theory--just make stronger and stronger statements about its validity!  -RL, postdoc, UW-Milwaukee

Question :Hello,  and Thanks.  2 questions. 1. How did you know where to point the detection device so that it captures just the two black holes?  2. I would expect most of the energy is released along a horizontal plane in relation to the movement of the black holes but is there also vertical energy release to be studied?

Answer :1. We don't point the detector at all.  It is sensitive to gravitational waves from all over the sky.  In this way, gravitational-wave detetion is more like "listening" to the universe than looking at it.  While there are gravitational waves hitting the Earth from different sources all of the time, only this event was strong enough to be detected.

2. The gravitational waves are emitted in all directions!  In fact, the strength of the wave is greater along the binary's axis of rotation than in the plane of the black holes.  Of course, we only get the waves that go in the direction of the Earth.  For GW150914, we can only roughly constrain the orientation.  We know that our line of sight is likely not too far away from the orbital axis of the binary.  -RL, postdoc, UW-Milwaukee

Question :If gravitational waves stretch (or compress) space itself, does this mean that the light travelling through that space is also stretched (/compressed)?  If so, wouldn't this mean that the effective optical path length along each arm remains constant? i.e. how is the signal detectable when the space itself changes shape along with everything in it? 

Answer :Timing matters. The light doesn't stay long enough to see a full cycle of stretching and compression. Think of this way. You send a photon down each arm of the Michelson interferometer. Now, one arm is a little longer than the other and you will see a signal. Much later, because the gravitational wave is low frequency, the arm has become shorter, you send another 2 photons down the arms. Now, you measure a signal with opposite sign. DS 

Question :If the time of detection between the two locations were a bit slower than the speed of light, would this suggest the graviton (if real) might have a slight mass?  

Answer :In principle, yes, but in order to test the graviton mass that way, we'd have to already know exactly where the waves were coming from.  The delay between the two detectors depends on the source location--and is, in fact, primarily how we determine that location.

The constraints on the graviton mass described in one of our papers (https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500213/public) are found by studying exact form of the gravitational wave's phase: If it deviates slightly from what we expect in general relativity, that could be the sign of a massive graviton.  -RL, postdoc, UW-Milwaukee

Question :Have you folks any dealings with the LUX instrument? How in the world does that beast work? Yes, I know it's not your baby but I was curious if you guys still have time to look into that sort of thing.

Answer :As far as I know we have no collaborative relationship with LUX. Of course we have people in our collaboration who also work, or have worked on dark matter searches. And we have had collaborators who
have worked (or are working), at the Sanford Underground Research Facility. 

There's some value in building a next generation instrument underground. One advantage is that it reduces "Newtonian Noise", which is noise from local density fluctuations in the ground and air around the test masses. Basically a sound wave propagating nearby makes variations in the local density. That means it changes the Newtonian gravitational force on the test mass, and that to us is  noise. Going underground reduces this effect, and some studies have been made at many places including the Sanford facility. KAGRA, an interferometer currently under construction in Japan is underground.


Question :what can be possible next big-thing in astrophysics ?

Answer :I think every field of astrophysics (or physics), could provide their own answer to that question. For LIGO the next big thing might be:

More events of the Black Hole - Black Hole variety. (BH-BH)

A merger of a Neutron Star and a Black Hole. (NS-BH)

A merger of a Neutron Star with another Neutron Star. (NS-NS)

NS-NS or NS-BH where other astronomers find a signal in optical, x-ray, gamma ray, neutrino etc.

A supernova in our galaxy.

and there's many more... (BO'R)


Question :How degenerate are the calculated black holes parameters?

Answer :Our errors include this. If you want to dive into the nitty gritty details, you have to look at this paper https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500218/public/main DS

Question :What kind of stuff will come from this? Will time machines or some other crazy machine spur from these?


Answer :Sorry no time machines! DS

Question :Do you pronounce it like L. I. G. O or just Ligo?

These things are important. 

Answer :The later. But not like the toy! The second letter is pronounce like eye (if you are a non native speaker) DS

Question :First: congratulations team, this is so incredibly cool, and everything I read about gravitational waves is building my excitement for the field.  I did just realize something sobering, though; the EPTA project is sensitive to waves in the nanohertz range, which corresponds to many of the predicted signals from the early universe.  So wait, the period of those waves are in the range of several decades??  Is there any way you can confirm the existence these early universe waves before I retire (re: a tardis)?

Answer :It depends on how long before you have to retire! :D But we are still ~20 years away from measuring the low-frequency rumblings from primordial GW background. The seismic noise in ground-based detectors is incredibly high in the nanohertz-microhertz range. Our only option to account for that issue is to have a space-based mission. Ever since NASA backed out of LISA [now eLISA] mission, it has significantly slowed down in its progress and the current estimates on its timeline put the launch in ~2035. Hopefully, the LISA Pathfinder mission pulls through with good results and we can start working on the eLISA mission. This detection will certainly push for an early launch of eLISA [It may also bring back NSF/NASA on the funding roster; I am being incredibly optimistic here]. Another issue is the amplitude of such primordial GWs. Their amplitudes are also very low [~1.0e-30], which is 1,000,000 times below our current sensitivity at the 'sweet-spot' of advancedLIGO. We clearly have a long way to go.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Since you're measuring for such incredible small changes of distances, wouldn't me sneezing halfway across the world already affect the results? Was it just good isolation of the setup, or was it a lot of mathematical and analytical methods to somehow filter out noise (and how could that be done, considering how much noise there should be)?

Answer :Well I'm assuming your sneezes would be very weak compared to the sneezes of the local population!
But you are right in the sense that environmental disturbances from the Earth or human activity have to be suppressed. One way we do this is to put everything in vacuum. That immediately cuts down on acoustic noise (air conditioners, traffic, sneezes!). Then we have a Physical Environment Monitoring (PEM) system that picks up local noise and checks if it is correlated with what happens in the instrument. A microphone is a very good detector of sneezes. We can check how much a sneeze right by the detector couples into our signal channel. The answer is not very much. If a sneeze right beside it doesn't cause a problem, then your sneeze thousands of miles away won't cause one either :). Gesundheit. (BO'R)

Question :What do you need to detect dark matter?

Answer :We are not trying to do anything with dark-matter.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :[deleted]

Answer :There is a web site about technology transfer here https://www.advancedligo.mit.edu/tech_overview.html. Not mentioned there are seismic isolation systems and in recent years we have pushed the envelop in quantum metrology. DS

Question :  A simple question; that is, about black holes. If the chicken is the theory; and the egg is the math which came first? I am asking this as I know you mentioned that the fun stuff is on the way !!!!!!. ;;;;; ))

Answer :Generally, you can assume that the maths came first. When Einstein thought about General Relativity, he was struggling to formalise his ideas. So he went to a mathematician friend of his and described his ideas to him, asking him whether mathematics existed that would describe this kind of behaviour. It turns out they did, but they were fairly recent - and up until then, no one had really had a practical use for them! So that's why Einstein, a graduate in Physics, didn't know about them. A lot of the research mathematicians do today and have always done we can assume will eventually be useful to describe something in the real world somewhere. And that's why we all really like mathematicians and give them money to do their research as well - the future potential is enormous. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :LA Ligo, your cousin from mandeville here, you guys do tours in livingston? 

Answer :Pretty sure they do! Check their websites for open day info. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Amazing discovery! Very big congratulations. I have a number of basic questions to try get my head around this - please feel free to redirect to another comment if I have missed it in this avalanche of interest!

1. Do all objects with mass emit gravitational waves, or are gravitational waves emitted only when objects collide? Do we each individually emit gravitational waves, or if we happen to bump into someone on the street, do we emit GW?

2. What is the relation between gravity and gravitational waves? Is the earth orbiting the sun the result of some particular configuration of gravitational waves?

3. Can gravitational waves affect things like planetary orbits, or even go on to create 'chain reactions' of collisions, as it were?

4. Can gravitational waves be ionising, or otherwise affect matter at the biomolecular level?

Thankyou!

Answer :Thanks, I'll try to answer your questions! 

1. The technical answer is that any object with mass and a rotational quadrupole moment will emit gravitational waves. If you haven't studied mechanics, basically any object that doesn't rotate around its axis of symmetry fulfills these conditions (I think). So yes, if you shake your fist you'd emit gravitational waves! However, in practice this effect is so weak that it takes objects on the scale of black holes to measure them. 

2. (and 3. and 4. as well) Gravity is a force that affects all massive objects (a massive object is just an object with mass - it doesn't have to be heavy). General Relativity is a theory of how gravity works, hence the travelling solutions it predicts are called gravitational waves - they are a feature of how gravity affects spacetime. However, they are far too weak an effect to really influence anything significantly - the Earth orbiting the sun is a result of the disk of dust that was left when the sun formed slowly accumulating into different planets, with the planets maintaining that angular momentum. 

If this collapse of these two black holes 60 times the mass of the sun would have happened right where the sun is, it would have caused a strain of 10^-5 - that means, a 10m track would have been stretched by a 10th of a millimeter. That's how weak these waves are, so they don't really affect anything on a meaningful level. If they did, we would have detected them much, *much* sooner. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Why do the black holes fall into each other? Why don't they just keep orbiting? What resistance drags them towards each other?

Answer :They don't keep orbiting perpetually because they are giving off gravitational waves. The waves carry off energy  from the binary causing the black holes to inspiral towards each other. 

Question :I'm assuming gravitational waves also have frequencies... which makes me wonder if resonant frequencies exist w/ gravitational waves... Could we somehow be affected/feel resonant frequencies if two orbiting blackholes were hypothetically close enough? And what would possibly happen to the time space continuum in that state?

Answer :They do have frequencies! GW150914 was chirping from 35 up to 250Hz, and you can even hear what that sounds like [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TWqhUANNFXw)! And the arm length of our detectors is very closely related to your resonance remark - the reason why GEO600 measures at higher frequencies than LIGO, for instance, is that its arms are shorter. eLISA will have arm lengths of 100 million kilometers, so it will measure at much lower frequencies. The ideal length for an antenna to detect a wave, be it gravitational or electromagnetic, is a quarter of a weavelength. And orbiting black holes closing in on each other is exactly the kind of events we hope to, and indeed have, observed! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

(edited to provide more information about antenna length)

Question :I'm a college student and I have read some news reports about gravitational waves，I think that knowledge a little difficult to understand for me, but the universe is so mysterious and amazing，I wanna learn something about it.
Could you give me some suggestions about learning popular science knowledge? (en btw..could you recommend some interesting sites or books?) thank you very much!


Answer :Hey - it's so great to see that you're so enthusiastic about science! I can only offer my own personal perspective, of course, so if you feel like something is not for you - feel free to try something else! I'll start with a list of books I really liked. 

One of the books I read after I had decided to do a Physics degree was Great Physicists: The Life and Times of Leading Physicists from Galileo to Hawking, by William H Cropper. It features 30 physicists from Galileo Galilei right up to contemporary scientists like Stephen Hawking. Not only does it give us a window into their lives, but it also explains their research in a way that is accessible to a layman. 

Another book I read was In Search of Schrödinger's Cat, by John Gribbin. It's remarkably in depth for a popular science book, and hopefully you'll be able to understand quantum theory a bit better after reading it. 

Of course, I have to mention Richard Feynman at some point. He's one of the greatest science communicators and educators of the 20th century as well as a brilliant scientist and a cheeky bugger to boot. You can read about his life in his biography Surely you're joking, Mr Feynman, which I think every physicist must read. Quantum Electrodynamics (Q.E.D.) is a more scientific book, but nonetheless extremely understandable and easy to read, explaining the most successful and accurate theory science knows. If you like those, I encourage you to check out his other books like Six Easy Pieces, explaining undergraduate physics in an accessible way, or the more philosophical The Character of Physical Law. 

Of course, Stephen Hawking's A Brief History of Time and The Universe in a Nutshell are both excellent as well and come highly recommended. 

On a slightly broader scale, I am tempted to give a blanket recommendation to everything Simon Singh writes. Fermat's Last Theorem is a great popular science book as well as a great story, and reads almost like a novel at times; and The Code Book I have reread more times than I can count - it's that good. This is more to the mathematical side than the physics books I have recommended, but that's definitely not a point against them. 

I've probably forgotten many books, and if you want to learn about biology or chemistry you will probably need to ask someone who's not a physicist. But if you read any of these books, you'll come across more material and many have a list of further reading in the back as well. So I think you'll find enough material, and I hope this is enough to get you started!

A final non-book recommendation: I really like the YouTube channels connected to the Vlog Brothers, Hank and John Green. The [SciShow](https://www.youtube.com/user/scishow) channel has a great mix of all kinds of science, while [SciShow Space](https://www.youtube.com/user/scishowspace) focuses more on astronomy - they'll do a feature on gravitational waves on Thursday, actually! And if you want to learn some basic knowledge in a bit more depth in a bunch of areas, their [Crash Course](https://www.youtube.com/user/crashcourse) channel is such a good resource that it boggles my mind how it is completely free. Apart from the scientific series on Ecology, Biology, Chemistry, Anatomy&Physiology, Psychology and Astronomy, they also have social sciences courses on US History, World History, Economics, Intellectual Property, Economics, US Government & Politics and Philosophy. You can pretty much learn about whatever you want there. So those are a good way to supplement your reading with a bit of screentime. 

I hope this helps!

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Do strong gravitational fields modify the wave in velocity or amplitude?

I have an image in mind of a perfect spherical ripple spreading in space (is this a correct image?). After the wave passes a large star will it still be spherical and of uniform amplitude?

additionally, if the wave tries to pass through a a region of space containing a black hole would it be absorbed? would the parts of the wave on either side of the absorption spread to fill the gap left?

Thank you for any answer and thank you for Your hard work

Answer :This is not my area of expertise, but yes - gravitational lensing is a thing, it influences even light (which bends around massive objects like a star) - and gravitational waves will also bend around massive objects, I think. But I'm not positive on this - maybe a theorist will show up later and have a better response for you! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :I'm sorry if this has already been stated, but I can't seem to find it in articles:

How long was the observation (time duration I mean) of gravity waves? How long did the collision /merge of the black holes take?   

Answer :This is almost certainly in the detection paper, but we're here to answer your questions after all! 

The observed event itself was very short - [here](https://losc.ligo.org/s/events/GW150914/P1500229/fig10.png) you can see the data recorded by both the Hanford and Livingston observatories. As you can see, the event was only a little over 0.1 seconds long - in that time, the black holes approached, merged and the resulting black hole settled in the ringdown you can see in the last bit of the data. In this short time, they lost the energy equivalent of three solar masses in gravitational radiation! Of course the black holes had been circling each other for a longer time, but our detectors are only sensitive at frequencies between 10 and 300 Hz, so we only started observing them at this stage. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :According to one interpretation of quantum theory, [reality doesn't exist until it is measured](http://www.gizmag.com/quantum-theory-reality-anu/37866/).  If we assume this interpretation is correct, is it possible that the LIGO machines highly sensitive measurements may cause black holes or other previously unobserved phenomena to come into existence? [Are you concerned about causing an irreversible change in the universe's energy resulting in its total destruction?](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2552130/Could-studying-universe-DESTROY-Changing-perception-cosmos-end-quantum-theories-correct.html)  :P

Answer :Sorry, this is not a good way to think about quantum theory. The question what constitutes reality is of no concern to the Universe. This is something we ask, and we cannot change what happened a billion years ago. DS 

Question :As a student currently studying astrophysics at university, how much do you think this discovery will affect the work I may do (there's a chance I'll be an architect instead but...) in the future?

Answer :As a potential future astronomer - the implications are pretty huge! So far, all we've been able to observe in the universe have been the objects that emit some kind of electromagnetic radiation. So stars, quasars, accretion disks etc we've been able to observe... but black holes and neutron stars are a different matter (maybe we can observe neutron stars. I'm not an astronomer). Supermassive objects that don't emit radiation... so far, they've been invisible to us. But with this new technique, anything that has a mass can technically be observed! 

Binary black hole systems have only been theorised about so far, but with this discovery we know they are out there! And by continuing observations, we will learn so much more about the universe than we have ever known before. 

This is the beginning of a new era of astronomy - before, we could only see the universe, but now we can hear it. So if you want to work in the wake of a paradigm shift... maybe stick to the astrophysics, I don't think buildings will change as much in the near future ;)

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany 

Question :1. How can you tell which directions the waves came from?

2. I imagine these events are incredibly rare. Have you calculated the odds of seeing another measurable event? 

Answer :With 3 detectors you can do triangulation by recording the arrival times. With 2 detectors you typically end up with a ring on the sky. The two LIGO detectors are slightly tilted relative to each other, so you get some additional information form the polarization. This then leads to a banana-type shape on the sky with this black hole merger.

Yes, we can make a rate estimate. However, it won't be very accurate with just a single event.  ~0.5-1 per month is a ballpark figure that is likely to be narrowed down once we've finished analyzing data from our first observing run. DS

Question :How were you able to tie the wave that you detected to the merging black holes?

Answer :Our theorists have run thousands of simulations of what waves would result from a particular kind of event, for example two merging black holes. By comparing the data we got with those simulations, we were able to conclude what kind of event they came from! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Thank you very much for answering questions.  

How would you explain the significance and relevance of the discovery of gravitational waves to a high school standard physics class?  

I have been focussing on the idea that, in science, a theory, such as Einstein's Theory of Relativity, means that all available evidence and mathematical modeling supports the idea and that saying something is a theory means we can make predictions and solve problems related to that area of science by relying on the theory.  Finding data to support a theory is limited to available technology.  Our technology has now developed, and a situation occurred, that confirmed that gravity can be modeled as a wave.  Did I get that right?

Also, a student asked if this means we can now try to create spaceships that "surf" gravity waves at/near the speed of light? I had no idea how to answer this question.

Answer :Maybe you can say that we now have a way to listen to black holes and learn more about these rather secretive objects. 

Yes, technology has developed to the point where we can measure gravitational waves directly. Gravitational waves are an intrinsic part of general relativity. 

Surfing gravitational waves would be nice! But no, they are very weak and would go right through your surf board leaving you stranded. DS

Question :Could humans make a black hole. If so how?

Answer :We haven't figured it out so far... even if we knew though, it would be difficult to do so in a controlled way. So we'd probably try not to do it. The YouTube channel Kurzgesagt did a pretty cool video (in English) about what would happen if you had a black hole in your pocket, which you can watch [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8nHBGFKLHZQ). Fun fact: That video started out as a reddit comment as well! They just recorded it and made the animations. Great watch nonetheless!

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Hey guys, congratulations on this awesome discovery. I am a little dumb when it comes to black holes and I am not fully grasping the gravity of the situation. Could you please break this thing down for me, in layman terms, as to what this discovery means for science and astronomy?

Answer :"We now have a way to listen to black holes and learn more about these rather secretive objects." If you have time, please browse the rest of this AMA. There is a lot of stuff here! DS



Question :Will this discovery help us reconcile quantum physics with astrophysics and does it move us any closer to the theory of everything, which gravity always seemed to gum up?

Answer :Everything we observed can be explained by general relativity. No new physics required. DS

Question :I'm confused? Are these gravitational waves the same ones bicep2 is looking for?  Or are they specifically looking for waves from the big bang era?

Answer :No, not at all. We observed the merger of two black holes. This event took place about a billion years ago. This event was located in a very specific place in the Universe. Bicep2 looks for the imprint that the primordial gravitational waves left behind. This waves were expanded by inflation and now span large patches in the sky. DS

Question :Holy shit. 3 solar masses worth of energy radiated away as gravitational waves ??!!! That's insane. Is it really all in the form of gravitational waves or other forms of radiation energy too ?

Answer :This is all radiated in gravitational waves. This event was off the scale! Black hole merges are not thought to release a lot of electromagnetic energy. This would typically require matter. DS

Question :In other comments I see mention of the frequency of detectable GW-generating events. What was the duration of the recent event that confirmed the discovery, and/or what is the expected duration of these events on average?

Answer :Look here for an answer https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czzjmsi DS

Question :Hopefully you guys see this question.  From what I understand, you are essentially using the change in interference patterns when two light waves cross paths (normally they are perfectly aligned so they cancel each other out?).

If I'm basically correct, what wavelength lasers are you using?  Would you get more resolution if you increased the frequency of the wavelength to something like UV or even soft x-ray lasers?  I'm not sure such things exist yet.

Thanks!

Answer :Yes, essentially that's what we're doing. We're using near-infrared light at 1064nm. Using a shorter wavelength would increase our resolution slightly, but it's simply a question of having the optical materials available that are suitable for the job. We have a lot of stuff that works at 1064, but at UV or even visible wavelengths a lot of materials would degrade (and the light would also be a lot more difficult to work with, given we need to protect our eyes from the 180W beams). For future detectors there are in fact plans to switch to 1550nm, because we can use crystalline mirrors that perform better when they are kryogenically cooled. There are a lot of factors that outweigh resolution considerations in the end! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :How strong would a GW need to be in order to visibly disrupt bonds mediated by the weak or electromagnetic forces? In other words, what would a GW strong enough to act as a disintegration field look like?

Answer :I think the technical term you are looking for is spaghettification ;-) Gravitational waves have a very weak footprint. You would have to be really close to a black hole merger, but at this point tidal forces are probably more important. DS

Question :Hello! 

Congratulations to you all for the observation!

Do the gravitational waves properties change with the degree of space-time distortion (i.e. would LIGO detect a wave with different amplitude if LIGO was near a very heavy star when compared with a earthly detection)? 

Answer :Gravitational waves can be bent like light beams around the sun. However, these effects are very weak for the sun and completely negligible for Earth. To have significant lensing, you probably have to sit behind a black hole or a neutron star. DS

Question :is the conclusion of this experiment that gravity, like other forces, manifests in waves?  

or is the conclusion that the black hole event caused something to happen in gravity that is out-of-the-ordinary in the theoretical pattern of gravity behavior?



Answer :Bear with me while I build up an analogy...

In 1861, James Clerk Maxwell published equations describing how electromagnetic forces behave. This includes the electrostatic attraction you would experience when rubbing a balloon against your pullover and then using it to attract your hair, but it also includes magnets - he recognised that these forces were two aspects of the same fundamental force. However, when looking at these equations, one can find a form where the time evolution of the EM field is related to the spatial evolution - this means the field moves through space. This is called a travelling, or wave solution, and as it turns out EM waves are what we perceive as light! 

Around 140 years later, Albert Einstein was working on equations which would describe how the force of gravity behaves. The equations he came up with would later be known as General Relativity - and just like Maxwell's equations, they also permitted a travelling solution. This is what we call gravitational waves, and it was a major prediction of Einstein's theory that we were only able to confirm last week. So gravitational waves are a direct consequence of how gravity works according to our current best theory. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany 

Question :Everyone keeps talking about space time. I can understand how space can be warped but I'm having a hard time conceptualizing how time, the 4th dimension if you will, can be warped. Can you kind of explain what that would be like to experience? 

Answer :Time is not an ethereal effect.  Time can be influenced by gravity because time itself is most likely a wave.  Waves get distorted inside a gravity well so time can become distorted near large gravitational objects.  Even around earth navigation satellites have to take into account time distortion for them to be accurate.

Question :What are gravitational waves and what makes their discovery so spectacular? In layman's terms... 

Answer :Gravitational waves a ripples in space-time. Think of it as stretching and compressing the space between two objects by a very small amount. "We now have a way to listen to black holes and learn more about these rather secretive objects." If you have time, please browse the rest of this AMA. There is a lot of stuff here! DS

Question :How did you manage to make the arms of the detector of equal length down to the size of an atom? How are you sure that they are precisely the same length? 

Answer :Very, very carefully! Of course we took care to build everything to the highest possible standards so the static setup is already very close to being equal in length, but the mirrors at the end can also be electrostatically actuated and moved so that the arms are exactly the same length. There are a few more details, but that's the gist of it. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :How do you imagine future iterations of this detector to look like? Longer arms, three dimensional detection with a lazer pointing in the z axis, perhaps satellite arrays with massive lazer arms? 

Answer :I'll just touch on two future perspectives - one of them is the space based observatory eLISA, which will indeed have arms of several hundred million kilometers length! This means it will detect waves of a much lower frequency, as the arm length mostly determines the frequency range we are sensitive at. There are also plans for what we call the Einstein Telescope, which would be triangular and feature several interferometer setups searching at different wavelengths for sensitivity over a broader range. First though, we're looking forward to Virgo going up this summer, KAGRA in Japan being built, and maybe LIGO India coming to fruition so we can localise our sources and achieve a higher uptime overall! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Would this discovery lead to any really cool consumer tech sometime in the future?

Like.. uh.. ^hoverboards?

Answer :We're probably not the right people to ask, honestly. We have pushed existing technology way beyond its boundaries in many areas, until it was sufficient for our needs. Now it is out there, and people will take it and improve the world we live in, using it in ways we never imagined. I'm not sure about hoverboards... but I want to believe! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Thanks for doing this AMA.... What future benefit will this discovery have on our future?  Apart from knowledge and a better understanding of our universe, could know knowledge lead to better technology?

Answer :There's no way to know what we will find out about our universe and how it will impact our lives! The most direct impact will probably be how other people use the technology we created to improve upon our lives. I'm very excited for that as well! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Would an observer feel time slow and speed up if a gravitational wave hit them?

Answer :This comment has been overwritten by an open source script to protect this user&apos;s privacy. 

   If you would like to do the same, add the browser extension [GreaseMonkey](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-us/firefox/addon/greasemonkey/) to Firefox and add [this open source script](https://greasyfork.org/en/scripts/10380-reddit-overwrite).   

 Then simply click on your username on Reddit, go to the comments tab, and hit the new OVERWRITE button at the top.

Question :Hey there guys, congratulations on your discovery.

My question is that because the gravitational waves have energy and energy curves spacetime, do gws produce gws that produce gws atc? Or does a mass need to move to produce gws? Thanks!

Answer :Gravitational waves work like this... a mass with a quadrupole moment moves in spacetime, and creates a distortion. This distortion then creates a distortion in front of it, which creates another distortion and so on. The result is that the distortion effectively travels - this is what we call a gravitational wave! It's a travelling solution to Einstein's field equations in General Relativity. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Could gravitational waves be the reason I'm a failure in life?

Answer :Even if you were, they wouldn't be - but you're not a failure. You're an awesome person! All you need to do is take charge of your own life - no one can run your life for you, because they're busy with their own. However, if you're struggling, it's okay to ask for help! There are people who love you and they want you to succeed, and they will support you when you're feeling like the world is too much for you. I know what it's like to struggle with life, but I also know there's always a way out. Good luck, I know you can make it! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Can you describe who was the first to notice the signal, or how that works?

For instance, was there someone sitting there watching the signal live, and said "Did you see that?  Replay that?"  Or is it more like, once a week the computer spits out a list of potential signals and this is just atop a list of mostly spurious signals.

Answer :Oh man, thank you for asking this question. Yesterday I went a bit off topic with one answer, but I really enjoyed writing out a small story following the events of the detection. You can read it [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czyqq4g) - thanks for giving me the opportunity to link to it again!  The cut-and-dry version is:

We're running real-time analysis on all the data we get, prescreening it to check whether anything looks interesting. GW150914 had the distinction of being an extraordinarily beautiful and clear signal, so it was picked up and only half an hour after it occured, two scientists in the Albert Einstein Institute in Hannover got the automated mail from the detection system, and were the first to witness history. The names Marco Drago and Andy Lundgren may not go down in the history books, but we're certainly very proud of them! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Wasn't this a well established theory? Their isn't a lot of experimental evidence for a lot of theoretical physics, but wasn't this like Gucci and people had been rolling with it for a long?

Answer :Yes, General Relativity has been widely accepted for pretty much all of its existence. But this was one of its major predictions, and if we hadn't found gravitaitonal waves something would have been wrong, and we would have needed to modify GR to account for this. We just couldn't be sure. But of course, we're much happier that everything turned out for the best and we found the waves just as Einstein predicted! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Sorry if this question has been answered elsewhere, but do we know why gravitational waves are so hard to detect? Is it just because gravity is such a weak force? 

Answer :Yes, the event we saw only generated a displacement of a 1/200 of a proton radius at its peak in our detector! DS

Question :Now that LIGO has detected gravitational waves, do you think that will usher new interest and funding towards LISA to further understand gravitational waves or deter funding since LIGO has already made the first detection?

Answer :LIGO has just proven that gravitational waves exist - this lends much more credence to our field, and we certainly hope this will be reflected in more funding, since we're really just at the beginning of this field! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Does the Ligo experiment On Gravitational Waves show if GWs go at the speed of light? Or is it possible that the wave a Quantum effect? 

(What I mean for Quantum effect is that the event was happening at the same time you caught it. Like its still a wave caught for a single moment as the wave was already filling the new change in the quantum structure of space-time there for moving faster than light. your Luck was that you caught a very long shot chance to detect it.) 

Would there be a way to check if GWs are running at Light speed? as Qm and GR don't fit together... yet.

Answer :Einstein's theory of General Relativity predicts that gravitational waves move at the speed of light - we haven't seen anything to assume any different, so we believe that's what's happening. They couldn't have been any faster - c is a very strict speed limit, and action at a distance has consistently been ruled out by experiments and theory. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Was the wave a one-time phenomenon? Or will waves of the same event propagate at some time in the future, like ripples in a pond after a stone breaks the surface?

Answer :These waves will keep propagating through space, outward from the source at the speed of light. Of course, We won't see the again. DS

Question :There is a preprint that says a gamma ray burst was detected close to coincident with the gravity wave's detection. Aren't GRB far more narrowly directed? This seems to stretch the boundaries of plausibility ... very shortly after the detectors' upgrades an event occurs which is detectable both as gravity waves and as a GRB.  What is the likelihood that some other event has caused a false positive in the gravity wave detectors?

http://gammaray.nsstc.nasa.gov/gbm/publications/preprints/gbm_ligo_preprint.pdf


Answer :I'm not an expert on EM follow up, although this is standard procedure whenever a GW event is detected - in many cases (like a Neutron Star/Black Hole binary collapsing) there will be GRBs accompanying the gravitational waves, which can assist us in localising the event. I don't know enough about the mechanics of black hole binaries to discuss whether a GRB detection would be plausible - but I can say with some confidence that this event was not a false positive. We didn't just twiddle our thumbs in the time between the 15th September and the 11th February, after all ;) 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Does this discovery actually do anything for the search for the "graviton"? Or are the waves discovered really like looking at ripples on the pond? Still awesome tho!

Answer :See for example here https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czymt1l DS

Question :Is it true that the Scientists at GEO600 were the first seeing this, because thanks to the time difference, it was about 5 am in America?

Answer :It is true that two scientists in Hannover first saw the data - however, they were data analysts and members of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, as we all are, and not related to GEO. I wrote a short bit of prose [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czyqq4g) talking about the process from the wave arriving at Earth to the announcement, which also features those two. Hope you enjoy the read! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :as A simple man, How does this benefit mankind?

Answer :Look here for one type of answer https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czzkbdw DS

Question :So, is the theory of gravity considered settled science now? What cascading effects does this validating discovery have for other fields?

Answer :Probably no one doubted general relativity before or now. There are still questions if it is complete, or if there is a depper underlying principle. Optical, radio, x-ray and gamma astronomy will be very interested in looking for counter parts. DS

Question :[deleted]

Answer :They interact with matter weakly, but can be bent like light. 

Yes, they will become weaker with distance. Same as star light.

Gravitational waves are the "communication tool" of space-time! DS

Question :Aside from being another major confirmation for accuracy of the theory relativity. Does the discovery have any other immediate impact for the physics community? For example, perhaps with the knowledge that gravity waves do in fact exist, there's another experiment that now makes sense to conduct.

Answer :There will be a keen interest by the optical, radio, x-ray and gamma astronomy community to look for counter parts. We all hope the the space antenna eLISA will get of the ground soon! DS

Question :How close to the merging of the two black holes that have been detected would one need to be for the gravitational wave to enter the domain of quantum mechanics? i.e. for the perturbation to affect the nanometer distances involved in atom interactions and significantly affect the energy levels.

Do we have any idea how it would be affected in the first place?

Answer :Not sure I understand this question. Quantum physics at the horizon of a black hole is responsible for Hawking radiation. Otherwise, I don't see why you would need quantum physics. DS

Question :Can we create a more sensitive way to detect gravitational waves? Like make a smaller instrument? How good is the current technology?

Can we create gravitational waves? 

Are there different types of gravitational waves, like radio wavelengths?

Can we communicate with gravitational waves?

Answer :see here https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czzqpdc. 
To make it more sensitive you would have to make it longer.

Yes, but too weak to detect.

They have a wavelength like EM waves. We don't categorize them like the EM spectrum. 

See answer above. DS

Question :So from what I understand, this isn't too experimentally significant until you guys can make a more sensitive detector, since to even prove these waves exists you were lucky enough to sense two of the most massive black holes ever discovered. Everyone and you guys are saying that this opens up a whole new spectrum, but how log until we can actually see into that spectrum?

Answer :This event was very significant and we learned a lot from just the first one. This was the first observation of a black hole merger. No other evidence for these systems exists. We are biased towards heavier systems simply by the fact that we can see them further out. With the current sensitivity we can expect maybe ~0.5-1 events/month. Of course, astronomers are used to see a lot of stars. DS

Question :A lot of the "what does this mean" has been answered with "now we can look at the Gravitational background, past the CMB" Everything I've been taught is that physics breaks down though due to having to reconcile quantum mechanics and GR. What can we expect to see when we get sensitive enough equipment? Or is this so brand new that we can't predict it?

Answer :LIGO with its current sensitivity can't really see that far back. Yes, eventually we hope to see the primordial background. Not a lot of hard facts are known about the very early Universe. I wouldn't be surprised to see more surprises, but I won't speculate. DS

Question :Do gravitational waves carry energy that is dissipated out over time? For example, when the gravitational wave detected at LIGO shook the instruments there so the wave could be detected, did energy leave the wave? 

Answer :Gravitational waves do carry energy. Since the gravitational waves only interact very weakly with matter, dissipation is very weak as well. The amount of energy deposited by the gravitational waves in the detector is absolutely negligible. DS

Question :I've heard a claim that the mirrors at the ends of the tunnels are extraordinarily flat - that is, flat to some obscene degree, like 1/2000 lambda.  Could you confirm that?  As an amateur telescope maker, I'm curious, how did you go about making a mirror quite that flat?

Is 4km a minimum tunnel length needed for detecting this sort of gravitational wave?  Is there any way to fold the light and essentially double your tunnel length, a la a Newtonian vs catadioptric layout, or would that impose a need for the flat mirrors to be flat to a physically impossible degree?

Answer :The mirrors are curved but their micro roughness is very small. The rms is polished to ~0.1nm. The coatings made it somewhat worse ~0.7nm rms. We are working on the later issue. We don't make our own mirror but purchase them from different vendors. We do our own metrology.

Good thinking about the delay line. We already use an optical resonator to effectively fold the length by a factor of 100! The problem with this is that it also multiplies any noise that the mirror experiences by 100. It is explained a little in https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500237/public/main, but it might be too technical. DS

Question :In theory in a far far future would you be able to detect a much smaller gravitational waves and maybe filter the big waves away. Like for example: IN THEORY could you detect the gravitational waves caused by a planet in a another solar system?

Thank you for this AmA it is awesome.

Answer :Not from the team, but my guess would be no. Our own solar system produces the same gravity waves you'd be looking for, and since they are so so much closer, they'd drown out any from other systems. The gravity waves we could detect will have to be many orders of magnitude greater than those produced by our own system.

Also keep in mind that the energy released in gravity waves is incredibly tiny for stable solar systems, gravity waves are generated when massive objects move relative to each other, like when they collide, or come very close. If the two masses are just in a circular orbit, very little energy is radiated away as gravity waves.

Basically for any objects that are "bright", gravity waves are going to be much less useful than regular telescopes for detecting and observation.

Question :Does this result disprove any previously credible theories/hypotheses? (please interpret those last two words loosely to include stuff like "approaches to thinking about solutions to some unsolved problems").

And, whether the answer to the above is yes or no, do the additional tools this gives you show a clear path to possibly (with more data) doing that? That is, a clear path to disproving some credible (hypotheses.. used in a loose layman's sense) that were previously thought to be hard to disprove?

And, if yes to any of the above, pretty please say more about which things might possibly be disproved, and how, under what possible conditions. Adding a lot of "possibly" here so you won't hesitate to say something for fear of being held to it (reddit never forgets what the OP said!).




Answer :Everything we observed can be explained by general relativity. No new physics required. Black hole binaries were always possible, we just had no idea how many were out there. DS

Question :So the black holes were surprisingly large, right? What are the odds that they are both 'second generation' black holes that merged to a 3rd gen?

Answer :This probability is considered unlikely. Multiple mergers scenarios require a globular cluster to be effective. The system gets a kick with the merger and might leave the globular cluster all together. These black holes are surprisingly large for our local Universe, since stars cannot get heavy enough due to the local metallicity. However, early in the Universe lower metal content allowed stars to become much larger. DS

Question :I've been reading about the tachyon hypothetical particle. If we assume that the Big Bang is the start of the universe sense that is the popular consensus in the community. If matter cannot be created or destroyed then all matter was created during the Big Bang. A particle like the tachyon has to have mass in order to be a particle right? 



Answer :Hey, you don't make any sense. Have a good day. 

Question :With our current technology, could we build a more sensibile version of LIGO?

Also, do relatively "static" form gravitatinal waves, even if really tiny?

Thanks very much for you work, what a time to be alive!

Answer :We are still working on commissioning to reach design sensitivity which is about three times more sensitive. With some fancy quantum technology we can improve maybe another factor of 2. Maybe a factor of 4 over design with cryogenic. An order of magnitude, if we can go to 40km arm length. Not sure I understand your second question. DS

Question :[deleted]

Answer :Same time. A billion years ago. It took that long for the waves to reach us.



Question :One thing I havn't really seen anywhere is an explanation of *why* you can measure a difference bouncing a laser off the mirrors. I get the part about why you can measure if the two beams are out of phase, but *why* are the phases off?

If you put a(n idealized) meter rod down along each beam, is it not true, that these rods would not seem to change lenght at all? When space is squeezed the rod is squeezed the same amount, so the rod would not detect that the lenght is any different, right?

How is it then that light suddenly takes more/less time to travel a distance which according to a(n idealized) metering rod is not changing?

Answer :Hope this post answers your question https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czyvqnh DS

Question :How this detection will improve on alien civilization research? That is the big question

Answer :The gravitational waves we observe are from black hole mergers. Doubtful, this has a direct impact on the search for life outside Earth. Daniel

Question :From my understanding, Einstein predicted GW based off of his theories of general relativity. How does the principles of general relativity relate to GW, and how did Einstein come to the theory that they exist- what could his rationale be?



Answer :Gravitational waves are a direct consequence of Einstein's field equations. Historically, it took a while to recognize that they are real and not just some sort of coordinate transformation. DS

Question :I have a question about how the source of gravitational waves are found. For instance, during this particular discovery it was announced that the source of the measurement came from two black holes colliding. Does this mean that a cataclysmic event should first be empirically found before listening to the gravitational waves from the event itself ?

Answer :The gravitational waves are probably the only thing we will ever hear from this event. We can determine that they came from a black hole merger by the gravitational wave signature. You can find the observed waveform in Fig1 here http://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102 DS

Question :I know this discovery is really cool, but are there any practical applications of it?

Answer :Not directly (yet)! If you are interested in technology transfer, look at this web page https://www.advancedligo.mit.edu/tech_overview.html. DS



Question :Can we generate gravitational waves? What would it take to create them on earth?

Answer :Yes, we can but they are too weak to be measurable at the time. Look at the wikipedia entry for more details https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational_wave DS

Question :Would it be possible to put out a real-time phase-shifted stereo audio signal from the detectors?  Then, people could listen to it via Skype, Mumble, Ventrilo, or etc.

Would it be possible to deploy millions of tiny IoT interferometers instead of (in addition to) a few big ones, and still get a usable signal?

Answer :A live feed probably won't happen in the near future. Listening to noise will become boring really fast...

No, a million very noisy instruments are still mainly just noise. DS

Question :Is there any other major discovery  left to be made according to Einstein's theory ? Does the discovery of gravitational waves lead or hints toward another major discovery in universe understanding ?

Answer :Most physicist believe in the validity of general relativity. There is little indication we need anything else. Of course, you can always ask questions like what is dark energy and this can potentially lead to completely new insights. If we ever see the primordial background of gravitational waves, it could also be revolutionary for early cosmology. DS 

Question :I don't know if you're still checking this but, could this open up new theories on the origin of the universe? 

Like, potentially black holes merging over time, eventually we get this ridiculous sized black holes just eating everything, eventually all forming into one unfathomable black hole, which in turn cannot support itself and exploded outwards, reigniting the spark of a dead universe?

Or along the lines of dumping all this crushed matter into another "universe", and when what I explained above happens, instead of the black hole exploding, there is this superheated hunk of recycled space matter that exploded instead, filling an empty void with a fresh universe?

Answer :The first question is a good one and is related to structure formation. Since every galaxy has a massive black hole at its center, one wonders where they came from. Hierarchical formation is one answer and, if we get enough sources, we may be able to see the beginning of the ladder. An other explanation is that these massive black holes are formed through accretion. I can't comment on your second question. It is a little outside the current Universe ;-) DS

Question :Since you get greater sensitivity from a detector with longer arms, does that imply that the future of gravitational wave astronomy might involve making an interferometer between orbiting satellites?

Answer :You are talking about the space antenna eLISA! One can also think about building an even larger facility on Earth. Space is hard. DS

Question : What are some possible applications that this might have in the betterment of humanity in centuries to come?

Answer :Your question is very specific, but I cannot predict the future and certainly not centuries ahead. This post has one type of answer https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czzkbdw. DS

Question :How can these waves be harnessed?  what practical value do they have in future developments?

Answer :At this point they are a purely observational tool. DS

Question :Hope this is still open. 

Correct me if im wrong but the black holes that collided are small relative to center of the galaxy black holes, , so my question would be... how much different would a supermassive black hole collision be? and could you theorize some implications for an event like that happening? thanks.

Answer :Yes, our black holes are stellar size and were almost certainly the remnants of large stars. The black holes in the center of galaxies are millions or billions of solar mass heavy. If two galaxies collide, it is possible that the central black holes merge. Larger black holes mean larger horizons and lower frequency gravitational waves. These sources are too low in frequency for LIGO, but are excellent sources for the space antenna eLISA. Actually, one of the key sources for eLISA. DS

Question :Would the moon be a good place to build gravitational wave observatories which operate in the frequency range covering that of LIGO? Or would space based observatories be able to eventually exceed the sensitivities of Earth bound observatories?

Answer :I guess space-based observatories will always win. At low frequencies, seismic noise is a big pain. This can be removed by taking our apparatus in space. Other aspects remain the same. Thermal conditioning also gets better in space; I would imagine thermal fluctuations to go down as well [not as much as seismic though].

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Is it possible to precisely determine the location of the merged black holes?

Answer :1. Our localisation gets better with increasing number of detectors!

2. Localisation is done by triangulation [taking time-difference between two detectors and mapping this on the sky]; triangulation gets better when we have more such 'triangles' to marginalise over i.e. more detectors.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What is the wavelength of these gravitational waves? If they are smaller than the wavelength of light used in the laser how are the shifts measurable using the constructive and destructive interference signals measurable over the noise that would happen from vibrations from the earth and stuff?

Answer :The frequency of signal(s) [form this binary blackhole merger] is of the order of ~200 Hz, while the Laser frequency [=Nd-Yag Laser for reference] is at ~1.0e+14 Hz. You can see how small the signal frequency is compared to the Laser frequency.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Thanks for keeping this AMA going. I think the answer is parallel lasers, but how do you ensure that the deviations isn't due to tectonic deviations or fluctuations in The earth itself as the lasers and reflectors are fixed to the ground?

Answer :The test masses (or reflectors, as you call them) aren't actually fixed to the ground - they are suspended from quadruple pendulums! So we're accounting for the Earth's curvature and any seismic effects. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Does gravity affect gravitational waves like it affects em waves? Probably a stupid question. 

Answer :It does! Gravitational waves can be affected by gravitational potentials, as well as other gravitational waves!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Do the waves travel at the speed of light?

Answer :Yes.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I don't understand why it is harder to detect waves that are further away. Do large objects dampen the incoming waves and cancel them out like a small island would slow an incoming wave? 

Answer :No. The 'islands' make no difference to our waves. Our waves move the 'islands' with them; 'islands' are embedded in the waves. The damping in our waves is simply from: A) the expansion of the universe, B) the energy being distributed to a larger and larger volume in space; this causes the GWs' amplitude to vary inversely with the distance between the source & the observer. 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What does actually happen when two black holes collide? Do they just annihilate emitting energy in form of light, matter and gravitational waves? What percentage of that energy do the gravitational waves take?

Answer :Our collaborators at Fermi/IceCube/[other] did not measure any excess in EM/Neutrino/[other] backgrounds at the time of this signal. This leads us to believe that a majority of energy was emitted in form of GWs. [A possible source, if possible at all, of EM emission from BHs is the mechanism of 'accretion disk(s)'. However, blackholes are not expected to possess enough matter in their disks for strong & measurable EM emission. Besides that, there are currently no solid theories for emission in EM spectra from BHs]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I'm curious about the power requirements for running experiments like this.  What is your average monthly electric bill?

Answer :I can only speak to one part of the experiment, but maybe it'll give you an idea. The laser we're using has a power of 180W, and it's powered by pump diodes totalling 1 kW - they probably consume a bit more electrical power than that. This sounds like a lot, until you consider that a normal kettle is rated at 3kW... We're probably using a lot of electricity, but I would guess still less than your average nightclub or Large Hadron Collider ;) 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Does this mean there could be a wave/particle duality for gravity like there is for light?

Do gravitational waves have power and energy? Can I measure them in Watts and Joules?

Is there any way to reflect/refract gravitational waves?  What about doppler?

Could I (hypothetically) modulate gravitational waves and use them for a communications system like we do with EM waves?

Answer :Nobody really knows how to quantize general relativity. Everything we do is waves.

Yes.

Yes, they can be red/blue shifted depending on your velocity relative to the source. You would need a black hole or a neutron star to deflect gravitational waves significantly.

In practice, we have no way to generate measurable amounts of gravitational waves.

DS

Question :Wouldn't GW's from other massive objects interfere with the GW's that was just discovered? In such a case, wouldn't them interfere with the discovered waves to make it greater or lower?

Answer :Yes, You are right! Interference is totally possible between GWs. In fact, if the frequencies are different [which they 'always' [=almost always] will be - statistically speaking], we can expect frequency modulation(s) in our signal. This is why we use time-series as well as frequency-domain [=Fourier series modes] data to analyse our observations. If there was another binary blackhole merger at the same time as GW150914, we would have seen the individual frequency modes, as well as the modulated frequencies in our time-frequency plots.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Hi! Kip Thorne noted in the presentation that the threefold improvement in sensitivity would generate a 27 times larger detection volume. Does this mean that gravity waves die out linearly and not with a square law? Thanks!

Answer :The amplitude of gravitational waves falls off in inverse proportion as the distance from the source. This is also the case with electromagnetic waves such as light. The intensity of the wave (i.e the energy that is carried by the wave across a unit surface area) falls off as the inverse square.

Question :Since the effect of a gravitational wave only is measurable  in two dimensions perpendicular to the propagation of the wave, would it help to build 3 different detectors at the same place each perpendicular to another to rule out seismic waves and noise? Is this the case with the different detectors Ligo and Livingston?

Answer :Yes, but is better to distribute them on Earth. This way you can also use them for triangulation. Not to speak about the difficulty of building a 4km high tower! (BTW, they shouldn't be all perpendicular, but one of them should be 45 degrees relative to the other. A 90 degree rotation will simply change the sign of the signal.)

The Hanford and Livingston detectors were aligned as closely as possible on Earth. This is to maximize the coincidence detection which is more important in the early observations. DS

Question :Does this knowledge have any effect on the possibility of time travel?

Answer :No. Where are you guys getting the time travel ideas from? I'm honestly curious! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Might be to late for this. But with eLISA, would we be able to detect GWs coming from earth too? After an earthquake or something like that?

Answer :No. 


Question :Don't the peaks and valleys of light wave get squeezed as it travels through squeezed space proportionally to the change of the distance between mirrors (due to squeezed space) and if so why can you see any change in interference when the gravity deforms space? Don't these effects cancel each other out?

And if light doesn't get squeezed by gravity wave then why it gets unsqueezed (redshifts) as it climbs out of gravity well?

Answer :Yes, the light itself is also affected by the waves. However, the stretch is always proportional to the length. So while we're talking about fractions of a proton's diameter over the kilometer-long arms, imagine how much smaller the distortion of the 1064nm-wavelength is. It's insignificant. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :First of all congrats!!! This is huge! My two questions:
1. So what about gravitons? 
2. And when will we start making artificial gravity?

I know it's all a bit futuristic, but that's all I can think about now!

Answer :1. No gravitons. We did estimate the mass(es) of graviton(s) for this signal, but our estimates are broader than the current static limit(s).

2. We do make artificial gravity; in centrifuges!

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut  

Question :Thanks for all the work. In still have some following questions, and I could not find them the papers (there is so much to read ;-):  

How is the equipment shielded from subtle magnetic influences and things like the Faraday effect? Or in other words: how thick is the steel?

With the enormous sensitivity of the instruments, it might be possible that you encountered strange quantum effects. Did you find any?

What impact did the geomagnetic storm around that time have on the LIGO? Or the earthquake at the Gulf of Cali? 

As I understand it, the LIGO dectects the difference between the radiation pressure on one arm and the other. Is there any measurement of the arms individually? Any other related information?


Answer :The vacuum chambers are either 1/8 or 1/4", I forgot. It is stainless, so not effective as magnetic shielding anyway.

It usually comes to a surprise to people when I tell them earthquakes and lightening are not rare events. Only big quakes and close by ones are rare. Same for lightening. What we do is isolate the system seismically. Of course, this might not be enough, so we measure how a magnetic field effects the test masses by using big coil magnets. We also have magnetometers as monitors continuously operating. To make sure the a magnetic storm or lightening strike doesn't effect us, we check the magnetometers. If we see a signal, we calculate the effect on our test masses using the measured transfer functions. Most the time we see nothing. Or, our isolation suppresses it low enough not be a problem. If it is a problem, we veto the data. We also have microphones, accelerometers, seismometers, even a cosmic ray detector. Look here for many more details https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500238/public/main.

We will ultimately be limited by quantum effects. We actually have a plan to improve the sensitivity by using something called squeezed light. At the moment we don't have enough power yet to see the radiation pressure noise. No, we won't be able to measure this in individual arms in LIGO. The static term of the radiation pressure is large and clearly visible. We don't like radiation pressure noise, so we chose heavy test masses. DS

Question :Where are all the other expected events?  Where are all the expected “orbiting black hole merger” or orbiting Neutron star LIGO events? Why all the LIGO hype after only just one supposed black-hole-merger event?

This paper states that we should be expecting 40 events/year at this point:

http://arxiv.org/pdf/1003.2480v2.pdf

That means that we should have seen around 15 more events since September 15th.

Where are they?  With all these expected events, why did LIGO not wait for a couple more events before holding the press conference?  Thanks!

Answer :We found this event so quickly because the data was extraordinarily clear and loud. Other events may be more buried, so it may take us longer to find them. We also wanted to focus on this, our first detection, in this paper - we focused all our resources on making sure this was the real deal, that we hadn't overlooked some error that crept in somewhere (we haven't, by the way). But all that being said, of course we wanted to share the news that we detected gravitational waves with the world as quickly as possible! So waiting another few months was out of the question for us - some of the people in the collaboration have been working towards this for decades, it would have been unfair to have them keep quiet once we had something to announce. But we're analysing the data from our first observation run right now, and we will share further results as we can. The big deal for now is that we have actually confirmed both gravitational waves and black hole binary systems existing. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Apologies for my ignorance, but as I understand LIGO works by measuring distance between to two points.

How you account for data pollution by local environment such as tiny earthquakes etc?



Answer :We isolate our detection equipment really, really well. The test masses are suspended from quadruple pendulums, the last stage suspension is a monolithic piece of glass together with the test mass, and each stage is separately and individually actuated. Other optics are on actively controlled seismically isolated tables, the entire assembly is in vacuum to prevent acoustic coupling, and the laser is pre-stabilised and actively stabilised as well. Isolation was the main problem in getting the sensitivity down as far as we have managed to now! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :When can we surf them? 

Answer :We are all the time! We just can't feel them because they are so tiny.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How do you know how far the black holes were? How do you know that they were black holes, and not neutron stars or some kind of unknown objects made of dark matter?

Answer :1. The amplitude of observed GWs decays with distance from the source. We can tell the distance by taking the difference between observed and expected amplitude [=if we were near the Blackholes].

2. The detection procedure requires a matched-filtering technique. This basically means that we compare the observed signal with our big bank of expected signals. The signal in the bank which matches best to the observed signal gives us the parameters for our objects. In this case, those parameters suggest that these were - very very very likely - two BHs. 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What's the frequency (ies) of the waves you were able to detect?

Answer :~250 Hz remnant ring-down frequency,  ~150 Hz at peak strain, remnant damping time of ~4 ms, signal duration of roughly ~200ms.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I'm studying to be an astrophysicist, with a liscense in astronomy, so basically an astronomer. Can someone with a liscense in astronomy work in the kind of fields that you are working? Almost every scientist doing what I would like to do which is combine physics and space has a liscense in physics, not astronomy. 

I'm getting scared that maybe astronomers just lock up in an observatory to keep the celestial map up to date instead of doing theoretical research and maaaaaybeeeeee experimental research.

EDIT: Sorry for the grammar mistakes you may find on my question, english is not my mother language.

Answer :I believe Astronomy has advanced beyond keeping-the-celestial-map up-to-date stage now. The simple fact is that to do advanced astronomy, one needs to have firm grasp of core concepts and philosophies of physics. This is because we have evolved from the peering-through-the-telescope era. Optical spectrum has lesser amount of utility now; we have moved on to X-ray, gamma-ray, Radio , Microwave, Infra-red spectra. This has led to more physicists into the field. I guess it is also - to a major extent - because we are accountable for explaining what we see/observe now, and simply not explore the unknown. 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :I could have sworn that the effects of gravity traveling at the speed of light was well established. Otherwise it would be possible to communicate instantly across the universe. And now I'm hearing that this new discovery "proves Einstein right" after so many decades. Could you clarify what was and was not established prior to your discovery?

Thanks!

Answer :This detection serves as a direct proof of a GR-like theory in action in our universe. 

The first test [indirect] - if you remember, was when GR explained the advance of Mercury's perihelion very precisely. However, GR is not the only theory that can explain this affect [of perihelion advance]; in fact, there is a big sub-group of speculated theories that can explain it. However, not every such theory would account of emission of GWs. This detection leads us to believe that the working physics in our universe is more GR-like. This DOESN'T imply that GR is an absolutely complete theory; it simply reaffirms our faith in it; it pushes us in the direction of more GR-like theories. [It wouldn't be a surprise if we end up finding non-GR corrections to our measurements in a few years/decades; we do - at some level - expect to have corrections to even GR! E.g. Quantum Mechanics is still to reconcile with GR].

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :So, if I am calculating correctly:

mass of the sun \* 3 \* (speed of light)^2 / (1 billion light years)^2 \* 4 \* PI  we got about 0.075 joules per square meter of the emitted energy (there probably are some general relativity effects in play here, I am ignoring these).

Considering what you say, that the waves don't interact much with anything, your detectors must be darn impressive. Can you explain in relatively simple terms, how do they work?

Answer :They work on the same principle as a Michelson Interferometer. The two L-shaped arms in a detector are kept in perfect lock by reducing the differential phase to 0. On arrival of GWs, the *phase lock* breaks since the 'effective' lengths of the two arms [in the frame of reference of the Laser photons] are now perturbed. This represents a signal. [Details here: http://www.ligo.org/science/GW-IFO.php]

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :If gravity affects how fast time passes, does this discovery change our view on the dimension of time and how it works?

Answer :This doesn't change anything in that context; we already knew how *time* as a dimension worked. This, in fact, reaffirms and confirms our ideas about *time*.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut


Question :I'm getting the impression that you are assuming the two black holes which merged to have zero charge. 

Is that so? If yes, what is the assumption based on?

Answer :Very good question! Here are my thoughts on it:

I. Since we generate template banks for BH-BH mergers; adding two extra parameters for charges (one for each BH?) leads to a tremendous increase in the population of the bank [depending on the binning of the charge parameter, of course]. I believe the affect of charge is not that significant to the final waveform [*I am conjecturing here; correct me if I am wrong*], and that correction will get buried in the noise [which is on the same scales] as a result of that. One can then ask a question: are we able to afford this exponentially increasing computational cost(s)/resources in exchange for introducing charge in the parameters of our template bank? 

*Note: I am not knowledgable of the dynamical implications of adding charge to the system for BH-BH mergers. I hope one of the CBC folks in LIGO can answer this question.* 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut 

Question :I never read a explication of what cause them
Are they caused when the mass change? Or when a mass acelerate and move? 

Answer :1. They are caused by 'mass acceleration' [=time-varying quadrupole moment, in precise technical terms].

2. Once the orbital [=mechanical energy] is lost for such 'accelerating' systems, mass may ~~annihilate~~ dissipate [upon a violent process] to emit GWs. In case of GW150914, ~3 solar masses were ~~annihilated~~ dissipated during the merger and emitted in form of GWs..

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Suppose we were dealing with 2D Flatland.  And, the universe of Flatland was a thin rubber sheet.  If you stretched the sheet in only one direction, would anyone in Flatland notice anything?  From their point of view, wouldn't everything still be the same?  I raise this question, because as gravity waves stretch and compress space, I don't understand how that is observable from within the universe.    

Answer :Not sure I follow your flatland example. What if you have a ruler oriented orthogonal to the stretch direction, and then you rotate it? Anyway, look for an answer https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czyvqnh DS

Question :What is the total duration of these pulses in time and what is our position within this duration?

Answer :Duration of GW150914: ~200 ms. I do not understand your second question.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What is the VIRGO team role in the GW discovery?

Answer :Virgo is an integral part of the collaboration. The data analysis teams consist of members of both Virgo and the LSC. Their instrument wasn't quite ready for O1, but we fully expect it to be online for the next run. Having 3 or more instruments is important for source localization. DS

Question : Does the discovery of these waves get us any closer to 'discovering' the hypothetical graviton or is it totally unrelated? Are the GW's made of gravitons?

Answer :1. It is related, of course! However, our detection is not able to put tight[-er] limits on the graviton mass than the current static limits. [Details in the paper]

2. Quantum Gravity implies a graviton; it is yet to see 'how' we can quantise gravity.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :It seems to me this event is a good example of the hierarchy problem between the weak and the gravitational forces?

At what distance would the release of 3 solar masses of energy produce species extinction if it was photons, neutrinos, or gravitational energy?

I believe I read that if that much energy was released as EM radiation that it would outshine the rest of the observable universe?  Yet, because it was gravitational radiation it is harder to observe it than observing the neutrinos from the Sun next door to us?

Assuming gravitons exist, can we assign a 'graviton flux' to this event as observed from the Earth, and how does that compare to the neutrino or photon flux from the Sun?

Was all of the energy released as gravitational radiation or was some fraction of it emitted as EM radiation?

Bonus Question:  Based on the destructive power of our weapons as we've progressed from weapons based on chemistry to weapons based on nuclear energy, does the prospect of advanced civilizations creating weaponry that harnesses the higher percentage conversion of matter to energy observed in quasars and black hole collisions keep you awake at night, or is that just me?

EDIT: typofixed

Answer :1. Gravitational force(s) *is*/*are* the weak one(s).

2. 'produce species extension'?

3. Yes, the gravitational wave intensity is very low. This is because space-time fabric is very stiff and all of the ~3 solar masses worth of energy was used in producing these tiny fluctuations.

4. Yes! If there was a graviton 'number' flux, I believe it'd be very low. [It'd also be a function of graviton mass] 

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Very very late to this, but I just don't understand how we can detect gravity waves from black holes, but not the big bang. Wouldn't that event be the single largest emmiter of gravity waves and be all around us?

Answer :You are right! The GWs from big bang are ever present. But...

1. They are *very very very veryyyyy* weak in amplitude.

2. They are at *very very veryyyyy* low frequencies, where our detectors are saturated by seismic noise and are very insensitive. 

*Solution: Space-based detectors + a lot more funding + a lot more advancement in technology!*

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Will we be able to make "gravitational tweezers" someday, the way we have optical and sonic tweezers that can manipulate small objects?

Answer :I. Nope. The typical wavelength of a gravitational wave is very much larger than a typical 'tweeze-able' objects' size. 

We could 'tweeze' planets though! Tweeze them off solar systems! We could even tweeze stars! But... 

II. ... the intensity for such waves is also very low; they are not powerful enough to tweeze heavy planets. :\ 

Could one tweeze a giant planet-sized balloon [=very light!]?

III. ... no. There is very weak [=almost non-existent] 'causal' coupling/interaction between matter & gravitational waves. This makes the space-time fabric very stiff toward matter-induced gravitational waves.

*Note: At some point, one must realise that all of the above answers are fully correlated and entwined together. Try to see them not separately, but in union. It is a good intuition for space-time 'fabric'!*

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How will this discovery impact A theory of everything or the multiverse?  Is it possible this technology may allow us to observe beyond our observable universe?

Answer :1. Whatever THE theory of everything is, GW(s) must fit into it. 

2. The term 'observable universe' is dependent on the method of observation. With EM waves, we can see as far back in time as roughly ~100,000 years [you can convert it to 'observable' distance!] after the big bang [using CMB]. With neutrinos, one can go a little bit deeper. With GW(s), you can go right down to a point in time *right after* the big bang! This is why they are so exciting! GW(s) literally re-define the 'observable universe' for us; they give us tremendous range. The only issue is to build devices to measure these signals from such early times/far distances.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :First of all congratulations to each and every one of you who has worked on this project at any level and thank you for taking the time to answer question. 

Understanding that up until this point our (humanity) only method of observation has been light in its various forms does anyone on the team have plans to build a space platform to detect and measure GW's? Since it seem now that the detection method is proven and the earth has so much seismic activity a orbiting space platform seem like a more accurate instrument.

Answer :Yes there is a proposal for a space antenna eLISA. It will specialize on lower frequencies. DS

Question :Roughly how many other GW signals have you found that you are, say, 95% certain of?

Answer :1! But, we haven't finished analysing data from October onward. We found a second event LVT151012 on Oct 12, 2015; it was not as significant [=strong] though. It was not considered a detection.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :How do you know with absolute certainty that the gravitational waves you detected came from from the black hole merger, given the incredibly weak nature of the waves and the distance they would have traveled compared to any other number of things in the universe that could have caused them?

Answer :There are no other things we know of that could have generated this signature. The signal itself was rather strong and very significant in our detectors. There is no such thing as _absolute_ certainty.  DS

Question :Im not at all educated in physics, but I love listening to people talk about things they are passionate about. My question is: what does this discovery mean? As in what possible advancements could your discovery give in knowledge or technology?

Answer :See for example here https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/45g8qu/we_are_the_ligo_scientific_collaboration_and_we/czzng6q DS

Question :Maybe this AMA is over but here is my question in case it gets answered. As far as I understand this was a "fishing" type of experiment where the detector is turned on and you are waiting for a signal to pop up.

Is there a way to purposefully observe a given point in universe for gravitational waves in a directed way?

Answer :In theory, we can *point* it in one direction, if we can *move* around such a giant detector! It is a matter of putting it [i.e. 'movable detectors'] into practise... :P

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What was the "breakthrough" that suddenly allowed us to observe Gravitational Waves?

As far as I know, we've been working on detectors for gravity waves for a long time. What's different this time that made the difference? Was the observed event particularly big such that it stuck out into the range we can measure, or is this just the culmination of years of gradual progress finally getting over the hump.

And along with that: Now that we've seen the first one, will it become significantly easier to see further ones, or is getting an observation still going to be rare going forwards with further gradual progress being made?

Answer :1. It is a gradual process. We shut down our LIGO detectors in 2007 for upgrades. The advancedLIGO detectors are now more sensitive which allowed us to make this discovery.

2. Of course! We expect to see 0.5~1 such events per month at the current configuration of advancedLIGO. 

3. The range of our detectors is roughly ~1-1.5 billion light years in distance. With further advancement in the tech behind our detectors, we can see further back in time and increase our expected rate of events from ~0.5-1 per month to a higher value. Future generations LIGO detectors will be able to do that - namely DECIGO, eLISA, EinsteinTelescope.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What sort of inventions do you think the discovery of gravity waves will lead to in the future?

Answer :Inventions in terms of technology?

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What other types of events could potentially be detected, besides black holes colliding?

Answer :1. 2 neutron stars merging.
2. Blackhole-Neutron star merger.
3. Isolated Pulsars.
4. Core-collapse supernovae.
5. Cosmic strings.
6. Primordial GWs from Inflationary epoch.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Is there a theoretical limit to how sensitive a gravity wave detector can be? Could we, for example, detect the gravitational waves produced by planets in our own solar system?  Or are we forever limited to using this for catastrophic phenomenon like distant black hole collisions?  Thank you.  

Answer :One problem on Earth is the rather large seismic noise and the Newtonian background (think moving air). So, on Earth it is very hard to imagine a detector with sensitivity below 1Hz. IN fact Advanced LIGO at design is limited to 10 Hz and above.

Space antennas don't have this limitation. The proposed eLISA project measures at milli Hertz. Not quite low enough for planets in the solar system, but good enough for close white dwarf binaries. DS

Question :Hello, I have a quick question here. I've been thinking through a thought experiment where 2 black holes merge, where both black holes have their own event horizons merge. My particular curiosity lies at the interface of the two black hole event horizons. At the interface of the two event horizons, it would appear to me that both horizons would cancel each other out, leaving a region of normal space inbetween. So I was considering that within that space there would be expansive forces operating due to the presence of the adjacent horizons, possibly looking like dark energy. Also, if degenerate matter within the horizons was exposed to normal space, would that not reconstitute back into normal matter, thus resembling a big bang? 

Answer :I am probably not the right person to answer this. The horizon is just an imaginary surface behind which nothing returns. So, when two horizons overlap, it just means your in double trouble. DS

Question :How regularly should we expect signals from these stellar events? Were we just lucky that the signal appeared so soon or do you expect these waves reaching us with some regularity? Also is the gravitational wave generated from the merging just a single pulse? (one time event per merge)

Answer :Yes, once the two black holes have merged and settled, there will be no strong emission of gravitational wave anymore. Unless, another black hole gets captured! Probably not very likely. Maybe ~0.5-1 per month. DS

Question :I am out for now, folks! It's 2 AM in Germany and ~~tomorrow~~ today is Monday! :\

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What method was used for time-frequency analysis of the signal? I see mentions of Wilson-Daubechies-Meyer transform but can't find many details about it. Was this method developed particularly for LIGO?

Answer :If you really want to dive into it, here is the paper to start with https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500229/public/main
This method looks at the cross-correlated power between the Hanford and Livingston detectors. We also use another method based on matched filters which gives better results, if you know what you are looking for. DS

Question :Can you explain how this is related to Newton's gravitational force stuff we all had to learn in high school? You mean all the times my teacher mentioned gravitational waves, it was never actually confirmed?

Answer :Actually, gravitational waves were first seen indirectly in a double pulsar system discovered by Taylor and Hulse. In that system the orbit was decaying indicating that gravitational waves were emitted. The agreement is very good. So we knew that gravitational waves were real. This is the first time we could detect them directly on Earth. It is also the first time we saw a binary black hole merger. 

In Newton's theory forces acted instantaneously and gravitational waves were not part of the theory. DS

Question :Does detection suggest a method of manipulation?

Answer :I don't understand the question. Manipulation of what? DS

Question :How many LIGO-like detectors around the world, working simultaneously, would it take to achieve a ~0.1 - 1.0 degree resolution on source direction? (If achievable.)

Edit: hopefully with some 3-sigma to 5-sigma in direction certainty for a 0.1x0.1 or 1.0x1.0 square degree zone?


Answer :You need at least 3 for triangulation. More detectors don't make that much improvement. They do give you much better sky coverage, so. What matters most is signal to noise. At the moment we are talking a 10 square degrees or so. Look at the sky map here https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500229/public/main. A third detector would give you another circle (or banana) which goes across the existing one, limiting the sky region to patch maybe ~5 degrees across. DS

Question :What kind of commercial implications does this discovery have?

Question :Forgive me if this is a really stupid dumbification of it, but is this basically exactly the same thing as sound? But instead of using matter as a medium, it uses space itself? Cos that's what I sounds like, and that sounds really cool.

Answer :Exactly!

Question :I'm not too familiar with General Relativity, so I have a question about gravity, which relates to gravitational waves: 
Is there a theoretical sister force to Gravity Analogous to Magnetic forces and electric forces?

My understanding, is that GR explains that Magnetic Forces are the result of electric forces operating under GR effects.  Also, we all know that EM waves are created by EM fields, Maxwell's Equations.  

So, I'm wondering if something similar would occur with Gravitational forces.  If not, what is the mode behind Gravity Waves then?


Answer :According to GR, gravity isn't even a force. It's just that mass condenses spacetime, and also 'falls' toward denser spacetime

Question :Would gravitational waves be affected by gravitational lensing in the same way that EM waves are?

In other words, is there a possibility of an "Einstein Cross" style event, where we could observe a black hole merger multiple times?


Answer :Yes, this constellation is not very likely so. DS

Question :How are you planning to harness this energy and how can it be used?

Question :How powerful would a gravitational wave have to be to make the whole Earth expand and contract by, say, an inch when it passed through? How about a foot? A yard?

Answer :Very. not going to happen.

Question :Hello LIGO ! 

When gravitational waves pass through matter , would it be safe to say they pass through like a wave in the ocean passing under a boat ? Like it doesn't change the current motion of the object ?

Also , I hear one of your LIGO stations were down during the pass of this GW . What if that station wasn't down ? Do you believe chances are good it would have picked up the same information ?

Thank you for your research !! It's all so exciting !

Answer :No, both of our observatories were online. DS

Question :Do the gravitational waves affect only space?  Or is the matter also stretched?  As in if I were close enough to the black hole merger, would my dimensions change?

Answer :No, if the force are weak since molecules are hold together by electric forces. If the forces are strong, you will suffer from spaghettification. DS

Question :Is there some kind of gravitational friction that will make these waves disappear over time?

Answer :No. They made it over a billion lightyears! DS

Question :Do all moving objects emit gravitational waves? If they do, does this mean that as an object is moving, it is expending energy to create the waves? It has been mentioned that three solar masses were turned into energy to power the waves in the measured collision. Also, since the created waves do not interact with matter, there seems to be no way of turning them back into matter, therefore, two questions:
- will all matter in the universe eventually end up as gravitational waves?
- is an object that is moving in space (not accelerating) constantly losing energy/mass by emitting gravitational waves? 

thanks very much for the ama!

Answer :You need acceleration in form of a changing quadrupole moment. Constant velocity alone without acceleration will not generate gravitational waves. Not all energy will end up in gravitational waves. Photons will be around too. DS

Question :Surface distance between Livingston and Hanford being 3000 kms, I assume shortest path distance in space between the 2 detectors would be little less but not 2100 kms (the distance that light would travel in 7 milliseconds) given the curvature of Earth is not that much. Moreoever the speed of light/gravity inside earth (the medium of shortest path in this case) would be less than that in vaccum resulting in longer time. Can somebody explain?

Answer :These are just arrival times. If the source is located straight above the two observatories, the arrival times would be identical. We use this for triangulation. It can't be more than 10ms, so. DS

Question :Thinking of the whitewater that occurs when multiple strong waves in a pond meet, does something similar happen to spacetime if multiple strong GRs collide?

Answer :yes.

Question :What are the chances of the collision of two black holes somewhere in space at this particular moment s.t. we can measure gravitational waves generated from it? Is it more a luck or there are millions of merging black holes in the universe?

Question :Would black holes that were significantly far apart but subject to each other's gravitational forces would they eventually merge?

Question :When considering these to lack holes does the idea of  a Roche limit make any sense? Could tidal forces be so strong to undo a black hole? Or is the black hole indestructible and the only place Roche limits makes sense is matter in the accretion disk?

A quick definition of Roche limit for our at home audience  - The closest distance at which a satellite can come to it's primary body before being torn apart by tidal forces.

Question :Probably the AMA has already ended, but maybe someone else can help me out here..?

Why did the signal only last 0.2 seconds? Can it be detected now? Like, if light from a far-off object reaches us for the first time, then we can observe it whenever we want after that point, as light from it would be continually arriving. Is a similar phenomena happening here? Why/why not?

Question :How much stronger would the gravitational wave readings have been if the two black holes had been much closer than a billion light years away? 

Answer :The amplitude would have been twice as big if the source was half as far and four times as big if the source was a quarter of a billion light-years.

Question :I read Advanced LIGO started observing run on September 18th. Then which run detected "The Event" on Sep 14th. 
I am wondering if it was increased sensitivity that enabled the detection or was it just a coincidence that GW was detected around the same time as start of advanced LIGO with increased sensitivity?

Question :Hey guys,

I am coming late for this IAMA, but asking my question anyway hoping for answers.

I remember a video from 2veritassium explaining quantum cooling to temperatures close to 20mK or less and how that technique was used by the miniGrail antenna in Leiden in the Netherlands, allowing it to detect GWs up to ~4x10^-21.
I remember how I thought it was awesome and kind of magic to be able to detect cosmic size waves by measuring variations in entropy at a quantum level.
The approach is really different from your so I was looking for an a crossed announcement on their side, or a confirmation, or comparable results... But nothing, almost seems like the project is dead.

So here is my questions: Are both approach viable and are you aware about any results datas they got on the same event or your process is actually really more sensitive and accurate? Did you hear of any similar results from any other approach?

Congratulations again!

Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7jT5rbE69ho

Question :The mirrors are suspended hanging on glass fibers, will they brake off easily if you hypothetically bumped in to a mirror? Did you put a pillow below?

I know, that it's in an isolated chamber with vacuum by now, but at one point someone had to walk around there.

Question :How did you know that the black holes were about 1 billion light years away? 

Question :So does this discovery bring us any closer to discovering Exotic Matter? Did the binary blackholes converging release any? Or does detecting these GWs provide any insight into detecting Exotic Matter and its existence?

Question :If there are gravitational waves and the universe expands, there would be some kind of link between wavelength (cause the waves would be stretched out) and the acceleration of the cosmic expansion, yes?

Question :If gravity can propagate via waves implies that there is a medium in which the waves occur, right?   It doesn't necessarily have to be a fixed reference frame, it just has to be that there is some medium in which the waves are moving. Therefore the question is: why cannot EMR also be modeled as a wave moving through this same medium? The apparent quantization of EMR could be the result of a resonant range at which a subatomic particle can capture the energy of that wave.  Just like a glass made of crystal will only vibrate at a particular frequency (or it's harmonics).

Question :When the wave passes, it stretches and compresses a ring of particles ortogonally (B. Shapiro 2012 PhD thesis). Can it be called the Poisson's Effect as it hapens when you press a piece of metal?

Question :It looks like this was started 8 days ago. I doubt I'm in the time window for this, but I'll ask anyways. Two questions. What are the prospects for this type of astronomy when it took such large events to produce any detectable results? I noticed on the end of the event had been subject to detection and monitoring and not the entirety. The second question is does this bode well for the artificial creation of gravitational fields? I ask this because this has been compared to the detection of the predicted radio waves and eventually led to their direct generation and use. Of course that discovery involved the creation of artificial sources and not natural events and may not be directly comparable that way.

Question :If gravity is propagating via waves implies that there is a medium in which the waves occur, right? It doesn't necessarily have to be a fixed reference frame, it just must be that there is some medium in which the waves are moving, right?  Why cannot EMR also be modeled as a wave moving through this same medium? The apparent quantization of EMR could be the result of reaction thresholds necessary for particles to absorb the energy of the EM waves, could it not?

Question :How is a chirp signal associated with gravitational wave detection?

Question :For the first couple hundred thousand years after the Big Bang, the universe was opaque. So it's impossible to see the universe any younger than that. When we have more gravity wave detectors online, with more sensitivity, will we be able to "hear" beyond that barrier since it was presumably not opaque to gravitational waves?

Question :So we finally "observed" gravitational waves for the second time. Can we actually use it to have an image of the BH? 

Question :So what's next for General Relativity? Every fundamental prediction has been proven. Is there any way we can test it further (e.g. by looking at more extreme events with GWs?).

Answer :General Relativity is still an extremely active field of research, numerically, analytically and experimentally. Future gravitational-wave observations will help us probe the theory in the highly-dynamical, strong-field regime, where it has never been tested before. Our first GW observation has already helped us place the best bound on the mass of the graviton ever! However, many of the interesting test we would like to perform require multiple detections. Also, future observatories, like LISA or Einstein Telescope, will help us do a much better job at testing relativity.
-- MI, graduate student at Caltech

Question :So how do you know what you detected were actual gravitational waves and not anything else, like--I don't know--seismic activity, or Jeff the intern farting?

I think it's great what you're doing, and I'll be the first to admit that this is all way above my head, but if what you detected are two black holes merging very, very far away, why wouldn't you detect something like solar prominences?

Most of the time when this stuff is explained to me, people always use a trampoline metaphor to get the idea across, but, I mean, isn't the universe more like a Jello mold with a bunch of marshmallows and raisins and stuff in it?

Anyway. I'm so very confused.



Answer :Each site has a huge array of sensors - microphones, magnetometers, RF antennas, seismometers - anywhere that we're sensitive to disturbances from the outside. And there's all sorts of sensors inside too, to check the alignment of each mirror, the motion of the seismic isolation. We can tell when something from the outside affects us, and we can tell when something internal goes wrong. The biggest thing is that there are two sites separated by three thousand kilometers, and we saw near-identical signals in each, within a fraction of a second of each other.

- AL, postdoc, detector characterization, AEI Hannover

Question :For these, now detectable, gravitational waves, is it possible to determine the source of these waves? For example do we know that these waves were from the 2 black holes colliding? Or is can it be from some other event of major magnitude? 

Answer :To do this, we used a matched filtering technique. Supercomputers have created waveforms from a wide range of possible sources, changing the total mass, the mass ratio, the angle at which we see it etc, then these templates are used in order to best match the waveform that we see from the detector. They're swapped out and the one that matches best, must be the most likely source! There's a bit more too it than that, but that's the basic idea.

BP - IGR & LHO Fellow

Question :Can I buy you fellaha beer? s

Answer :Never the one to say no to free beer, mate.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Electric universe? 

Question :How are we confident that the LIGOs result was from some seismic activity? or some other phenomenon? 

Answer :We are very confident that it isn't environmental. We carefully characterized the instrument for these disturbances (and many more) and we have an array of environmental sensors to monitor exactly this. One of the reasons it took so long, until we went public, was to make sure we fully understood everything that went on during this one second. Look for more details in other posts, or if you want to dive into the details look at our paper on this subject: https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500238/public/main DS

Question :What is the lamest way you would use a awesome super power?

Answer :I would use it to fight a LIGO-sized duck.

PJF, assistant scientist, interferometric sensing and control
*Edited initials to distinguish from other PFs

Question :What is your favorite LEGO toy?

Answer :http://theplasticbrick.com/images/view/large/8367.jpg -GL, assistant professor, Fullerton, CA

Question :Did your write your own wikipedia page, or did other people do it?

Question :If an event like this GW had occurred in the place occupied by the Sun, how would this affect planet Earth and his habitants, in terms of electromagnetic radiation and in terms of spacetime distortion?

Answer :The key aspect to this event is that it was a merger of two black holes - the gravitational waves were the only radiation they were emitting, so there was no electromagnetic radiation whatsoever (as opposed to neutron star mergers, for which we would expect some EM follow-up). If we assume that this event would somehow occur without the dramatic consequences putting 60 solar masses in the spot of the sun would have for the solar system, we would notice this wave a lot more easily - the intensity varies with 1/r.

 The sun is seven lightseconds away, this event was 1.3 billion lightyears away! Some back of the napkin maths gives us a strain of about 10^-5 (give or take a few orders of magnitude). So a common 1m ruler you have would experience a stretch of 0.1mm! The entire earth would stretch by some 120m over its diameter, which is actually pretty impressive!

Since it's space itself that stretches, I don't think any structural damage would be done. But in this case, if you took a bit of care you could probably set up an interferometer in your living room that would be capable of detecting that intensity of gravitational radiation. 

-Justus S/ High power laser development, Hannover/Germany

Question :What is gravity?

Answer :Keeps you on the ground!

Question :The experiment seems so simple - and measuring interference patterns has been around for a very long time. Why do you think Einstein wasn't able to come up with such an experiment, or is it because there was some missing puzzle piece we discovered since that time?

Answer :The conception is simple and old; the scales that we are trying to measure are extremely extremely low though! That is what makes them the most sensitive detectors on the planet! A ridiculous amount of improvement had to be made to the existing technology to get where we are today. LIGO detectors are many many orders of magnitude ahead of any commercially available technology today in Optics, Mechanics, Electronics etc.

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :What are gravitational waves, why is the discovery important?

Answer :Look at this great wikipedia article https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational_wave for more details on gravitational waves. DS

Question :Have any of the researchers involved reported this finding being directly responsible for them getting laid? 

Answer :We haven't had the time to use the 'LIGO card' yet. I'll keep you updated if we manage to succeed. :P

-- AvneetSingh, Observational Cosmology and Astrophysics, LIGO & Max-Planck-Institut

Question :Do you guys ever say, "LIGO my EGGO"?

Answer :Nope! But I'm sure some of my punny colleagues currently reading this AMA will be all over that.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

[edit: affiliation]

Question :#**SPEED OF LIGHT ??**
It has been said that the waves propagate at the speed of light. Since the speed of light in the vacuum of the universe is a bit slower than in an absolute vacuum (because of microwave background radiation), does this mean they move "faster" than photons traveling through space? Or is their speed dependent on the medium it travels through, and is exactly the same as speed of light at that moment?
Thanks

Also I envy you your line of work

Answer :Correct, gravitational waves are not effected by dust (in any significant way). DS

Question :You guys like PB&J's?

Answer :Meh.

-VR PhD student, U of Oregon, LIGO WA site

Question :When The TV show, Big Bang Theory, catches wind of this, which of your positions do you think will be portrayed by Sheldon, and could any of you be friends with him? I'm certain he'd love to play words with friends with you.

Answer :Oh boy, it's been a while since I watched TBBT... It got a bit too stupid for me after the 4th season or so. But each to their own, if you enjoy it more power to you! I know plenty of physicists who do as well, it's just not for me. 

On to your question though - I work with lasers, so I'd probably be closest to Leonard. There are all kinds of scientists working on this huge project though - Sheldon would probably be one of the guys who run simulations in numerical relativity, using the linear form of Einstein's field equations to find what kind of waveforms we would get from what kind of event. We also have a lot of engineer-y types (except we actually understand our work, so we call ourselves physicists ;) ) who build the suspensions, the noise suppression and all the control circuitry. And finally, since we have detected something now, we can all call ourselves gravitational wave astronomers now! We scientists are a very open and accepting folk - but if you're an asshole, you might still find it difficult to be around people. I'm not sure Sheldon would fit in well in what is a hugely collaborative environment, he seems like a bit of a lone ranger to me. But if he started work here, we'd definitely invite him to join us for lunch a few times and give him a shot as a person, and not judge him prematurely - that's just the decent thing to do. 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Do bananas help make gravitational waves detectable?

Answer :We certainly like to eat them - so they fuel the brains that build the machines! 

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :How's it like getting laid ?

Question :How did you discover gravitational waves? 

Answer :You should read the articles and watch the press conference. 

Question :Why don't you talk about white holes? Are you racist? #whiteholesmatter

Question :Would you rather fight 100 duck sized horses or a horse sized duck?

Answer :That's too difficult of a problem for Gravitational Wave Astrophysicists to answer. We'll stick with General Relativity.

Question :If Joe had 2 cookies, and he ate 1 of them, what is the circumference of Jupiter?

Answer :42

Question :how does one detect gravitational waves with Legos, anyway?

Question :How much tp does ones black hole needs?

Question :You are continuing a long line of scientific fraud. How far will your team go to justify the expense of your operation? Why not just tell the truth? Science and nature are amazing and don't require fictitious black holes and gravitational waves to make it interesting.

Answer :The nice thing about science is that it is true whether or not you believe in it. Even Einstein struggled with that concept sometimes... I hope you'll be able to look at our results with an open mind at some point :)

Justus S, PhD student in high power laser development in Hannover, Germany

Question :Holy shit what a load of bullshit. How many billions of miles away was that again?thanks for the theory but I'm good lol. 

Question :At the exact moment of your detection, at 9:50:45 UTC 9/14/2015 - at 9:50:39 UTC a 4.6 earthquake was monitored in Xiaozhongdian, China. http://earthquake.usgs.gov/

Can you assure us that this Earthquake had no effect on your instruments? Also, if your instruments aren't sensitive enough to earthquakes here on Earth, how can we expect them to be sensitive to "quakes" 1.3 billion light years away?

Let's check the paper you yourselves wrote:

https://dcc.ligo.org/public/0122/P150914/014/LIGO-P150914_Detection_of_GW150914.pdf

The build up occurs at the exact moment of this Earthquake in Xiaozhongdian, China at 9:45:39 as can obviously be seen in Fig. 1.

How can you rule out instrument anomaly occurring from this Earthquake? 

So, lets get this straight, a single instrument, detecting a single event that lasted less than a second... operating during an earthquake... Unrepeatable, unverifiable, unscientific... is the basis for your discovery. You've got to be f'n kidding me.

What makes this observation any more Nobel worthy than the Alien WOW! signal?

edit: yeah murmur it up douchebags, vote it down. prove me wrong. The LIGO paper specifically states that they were not aware of any long range seismic events at this time. Obviously there was a long range seismic event occurring at this exact moment. The writers of this paper are obviously blinded by confirmation bias of black holes & gravitational waves, even to the extent that they will use an Earthquake in China to make a fraudulent discovery.

Answer :Wow.  Who needs a hug?  "orrery" does!

There were actually two instruments that simultaneously detected the event, and we wrote a whole separate paper on the question of noise around the time of the signal, and how we verified that the signal was not due to that noise.  You can read it here: https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1500238/public/main

-PC (Data Analysis Computing/Optimization - LIGO Lab/ Caltech)


Question :Science AMAs are posted early to give readers a chance to ask questions and vote on the questions of others before the AMA starts.
 

Guests of /r/science have volunteered to answer questions; please treat them with due respect. Comment rules will be strictly enforced, and uncivil or rude behavior will result in a loss of privileges in /r/science.


If you have scientific expertise, please verify this with our moderators by getting your account flaired with the appropriate title.  Instructions for obtaining flair are here: [reddit Science Flair Instructions](http://www.reddit.com/r/science/wiki/flair) (Flair is automatically synced with /r/EverythingScience as well.)


Answer :Do these detections prove that gravity is a fundamental force and not "emergent"?

Question :What is the significance of knowing that gravitational waves are real? Does everything emit these waves or is it only special cases? Can your instruments get more accurate and precise or are they about as accurate as can be? 

Answer :Having detected gravitational waves is significant for many reasons: it affirms that our current understanding of gravity (General Relativity) works well up to the limits that we've tested it; it gives us insight into exotic phenomena like the merging of black holes; and importantly, it provides us a whole new way of observing the universe! With three solid detections under our belt, we can safely say that we've opened a new window into observational astronomy that will answer all sorts of questions (some of which we probably haven't even thought to ask yet).

As for what can emit gravitational waves? Anything that has mass (or energy) which accelerates in the correct way can produce gravitational waves. But not just any acceleration will do! If the acceleration has spherical symmetry (imagine a ball that just gets bigger and smaller) or cylindrical symmetry (imagine that same ball spinning around on its axis) then it will not produce gravitational waves. Stars, for example, don't emit GWs as they expand and contract, nor when they're simply rotating. But if you throw in an asymmetry (a "bump" on the surface, or a second star in orbit around the first) then you can produce gravitational waves!

This is true even of very small objects! Waving your hand back and forth satisfies all these requirements (your hand has mass and the act of waving is a type of asymmetric acceleration), so ostensibly this should produce gravitational waves too! But even though gravity seems like a powerful force (it keeps us on the surface of the Earth, after all) in truth the force of gravity is quite weak. And gravitational waves are weaker still! 

In order to produce gravitational waves that are detectable, you need far more mass and energy than you can get from waving your hand. In order for LIGO to be able to detect gravitational waves, they have to be generated by objects with mass comparable to our sun or larger! The two black holes that merged during the GW170104 event each had masses 20 to 30 times greater than our sun, and the gravitational waves were still tiny! So tiny, in fact, that their effect on our detectors was to change their length (4 kilometers) by barely a couple ATTOmeters -- a thousand times less than the diameter of an atomic nucleus. It's amazing that we can build a device sensitive enough to measure changes in length that small!

With that said, we have plans to make our detectors even more sensitive. Right now we're in our second observing run. When we're finished with this run late this summer, we'll shut down for a little while to make improvements. We'll repeat this process until we get to "design sensitivity" - which should be a factor of 2-3 more sensitive than we are now. 

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Curious: what is the wavelength of gravitational waves? Big like radio or small like ultraviolet?

Answer :Hi /u/greenthumble,
Light, as a wave can be of any wavelength. We classify them, as you rightly suggest into groups, radio with long wavelength, visible light in thew middle, and gamma rays on the short side.
However, gravitational waves aren't light, they're  an entirely different phemnomenon - stretches and squeezes in the spacetime metric that can alter the length of a metre. They, like light, cover a spectrum. Gravitational waves with longer wavelengths (lower frequencies) have been about, we think, since the big bang. Events at a 10-6 hertz correspond to really heavy objects like supermassive black holes in the centre of galaxies, and  as we move up the frequency scale, we think about lighter things, a pair of black holes,  a pair of neutron stars, and faster moving lighter things too.
I hope that this has answered your question!

Question :Is the LIGO just running all the time, collecting data? How much power does it use? Is it expensive to run and maintain?

How much data does the LIGO create and how do you seperate signal from noise?

Thanks!

Answer :During observation runs we try to have the detectors collecting data 24 hours a day. However many things can cause the detectors to go down, such as earthquakes, power glitches and even wind. There are people on site 24/7 to keep an eye on the detectors and to fix them when they go wrong. There are also regularly scheduled times when the detectors are taken offline to preform maintainance and commisioning tasks.

While running the detectors, we collect a vast amount of data, currently as I am writiing this the Livingston detector is collecting 53 MB/s (so over 100 MB/s for the two LIGO detectors). As well as the gravitational wave data we also monitor every subsystem of the detector as well as the buildings and local enviroments.

Running the interferometer uses a significant amount of power to maintain the low pressure in the 4km vacuum enclosures and to run the lasers and the computing facilities. Infact after labour cost, electricity usage is the largest operating cost.

Signals can be separated from the background noise by looking for those signals that show up in both detectors within a few miliseconds of each other (the time is takes a gravitational wave to travel between the two detetors in Louisiana and Washington state). These signals can be further extracted from the noise by comparing them to templates of what black hole collisions look like.

For more information on how we collect and analyse data see a previouse answer:
https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/6fekz5/science_ama_series_we_are_the_ligo_scientific/dihugyo/

LIGO Science Fellow/UoGlasgow Research Student

Question :Hi, I've done a little over 6000 classifications in Gravity Spy. :)
What kind of sources do false positive chirps usually come from? Do you get false positives that hit both detectors at about the right timing?

Answer :Hi /u/crazyjkass,
Thanks for your work on GravitySpy, it really does a lot to help us on our searches!

Our detector is very sensitive, and reacts to an awful lot. When the mirrors move relative to each other, we get some signal in the strain channel. Our code then runs over that code with what's called a matches template search, looking for compact binary coalescences  - 2 black holes, 2 neutron stars, or one BH and one NS, falling in ands spiralling around each other. Each mass pairing gives a unique signal, and  so a unique template. When the data and the template have a low mismatch, then it looks like a signal.
However, as you know, not all signal are true signals. These false positive chirps are caused by any number of disturbance to the interferometer. Noise sources might be a truck going down a nearby bumpy road, a refrigerator running where it should be quiet, or 100 LEDs flashing in unison. but none of these look like chirps.

The chirpiest noise that I can think of is something we call a "blip glitch" - they're pretty short, and like a chirp, they have a rising edge, so could have low mismatch. These blips have a wide variety of morphologies, so can look like any number of events.

Unfortunately, we don't know what causes these blips. It's an infamous problem in the detector characteristics team. That's why we need people like you to help sort them out for us! Computers need a lot of training to tell the different between a blip and a chirp, but humans are better at that kind of task.
Fortunately, blip glitches are short, and don't happen all that often - so the chances of getting them in both detectors at once are pretty low. It's not impossible though. 

I hope that's answered your question,

Continuous waves data analysis,
Research student at University of Glasgow

Question :One thing that was said while at college is that gravity is one of the least understood forces that act upon us, and that there is a enormous gap of knowledge compared to, let's say, magnetism and electricity. We feel it and predict what could happen, but what it actually is is unknown. It's much like biology where we can see what happens and kinda predict and manipulate some reactions, but we mostly have no idea on what's going on.

Does that applies to gravity? How LIGO helps to understand the nature of it? Pushing to science fiction a little, do you think we could even manipulate gravity even without understanding it clearly, much like we do with biological processes?

Answer :Hi /u/tigerjerusalem,

Yes, in many ways gravity is the least understood of the forces we know about in nature. For example, Newton's constant G determines the overall strength of gravity, and it has not been measured very accurately compared to the constants associated with the other forces. This is because gravity is so much weaker than the other forces, and building an experiment to accurately measure the strength of gravity is very challenging.

We do have a great theory for how classical gravity works: Einstein's theory of General Relativity. But because gravity is so much weaker than, say, the electromagnetic force, it's also hard for us to verify all of the predictions from this theory. We send and receive electromagnetic waves like light and radio all the time, but it takes the incredible efforts of the LIGO and Virgo collaborations to detect gravitational waves from the most intense sources in the whole universe. So while we have a theory of gravity, our efforts to test it are way behind compared to other forces.

The situation is even worse if we are talking about understanding gravity at the smallest scales. For this we need a theory of quantum gravity. There is no agreed upon theory of quantum gravity, while we've understood the quantum theory of the other forces for decades.

Now, as for harnessing gravity, this is tough, and again it's because gravity is so weak. It takes a lot of mass to make much gravity. Also, the only way to do really cool things with gravity (like antigravity or faster than light travel) requires "exotic" forms of matter. These may be impossible to  realize in the lab in quantities that allow us to do anything.

Question :Thanks for the AMA. What crossover is there (if any) between your research and research into Higgs Fields and Dark Matter?  What research into these three topics will most greatly impact the others?

Answer :The ubiquity of intermediate mass black holes evidenced through their detection via LIGO will certainly place [black holes as all dark matter](https://outreach.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:James_Salsman/BHDM) at the forefront of all the dark matter theories. Given that it explains SMBH formation, cuspy halos, missing dwarfs, and other observations which the formerly leading particle theories of dark matter (for which there has never been a shred of confirmed empirical evidence, I should add) could not, it should have been the leading theory of dark matter all along. 

This will, however, put an extraordinarily large and thus far well-funded group of theorists and experimentalists looking for work outside their established professions, including hundreds of postdocs, professors, and lab techs, and will likely soon cancel their billions-per-year budgets. AMS-02 alone was a $4 billion project.

Question :how fast do gravitational waves travel?

Answer :Indeed, as others have mentioned, gravitational waves travel at the speed of light!

But it's less that "gravitational waves travel at the same speed as light" and it's more that "there is a maximum speed for any interaction in nature." Gravitational waves, light (or other theoretical massless particles) all travel at this maximum speed. This "speed limit" crops up all over physics! (And it is intimately related to the concept of "spacetime" in our modern theory of gravity: General Relativity.)

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Is LIGO currently sensitive enough to detect a binary neutron star inspiral? What about just the rotation of a single neutron star? How significant of a discovery would detection of either phenomenon be?

Answer :LIGO is certainly sensitive enough to detect a binary neutron star inspiral, IF the inspiral happens close enough to us! 

There are two major things that contribute to LIGO's sensitivity to a given type of event: how massive the objects are, and how far away from us the event occurs. More massive objects (like the 20 and 30 solar mass black holes that merged during GW170104) can be detected when they are much further away (up to a few billion light years). Since neutron stars are less massive, they need to be closer to us in order for LIGO to be able to detect them. Currently, LIGO should be sensitive to binary neutron star mergers out to a few hundred million light years. The fact that we haven't seen any (yet!) doesn't mean that LIGO isn't sensitive to them, it just means there haven't been any "nearby" mergers during the (relatively brief) time that LIGO has been observing.

For singular spinning neutron stars the story is a bit different. We expect the gravitational waves from single neutron stars to be much weaker than those from binary mergers. As a result, we only have a real shot at detecting these sources if they're here in our own galaxy. But the way we search for single neutron stars is also different. For binary mergers, we're looking for short (loud) "chirps" of gravitational waves. Single neutron stars will emit with an almost constant "hum." Where as the "chirp" is over and done with, the "hum" is always there, so the longer we listen for it the better chance we have of detecting it.

In either case, we have a great deal to learn from detecting gravitational waves from neutron stars. Any observation of a neutron star merger or a single neutron star will help us answer questions about the details of their structure and composition (still relatively open questions). Binary mergers of neutron stars are thought to be the cause of certain gamma-ray bursts (which are ultra-relativistic and highly energetic explosions). Detecting one with LIGO at the same time as an electromagnetic telescope or satellite will answer a lot of essential questions about how these events occur and what causes them! This so-called "multimessenger astronomy" is the next big frontier in observing our universe, and events involving neutron stars are our best shot at getting there!

No matter how you slice it, a LIGO detection involving a neutron star would be an enormous discovery!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :How can you determine the distance from just the waves? Is it the intensity? And how accurate are these readings?

Answer :Hi, /u/TransToucanSam, and thanks for the question.

In order to know this answer, you need a little background on the search algorithms and source parameters.

The kind of search we use to find these binary-black hole signals (and any binary merger) is called a matched template search. We pick 2 black hole masses, some starting conditions (like spin parameters, which way the merger is facing etc) at simulate the binary merger, and what signal we would see at Earth. Then, we take that simulated signal (the template) and compare it to the data we have. We move that template along in time for the whole observation, at each time, measuring the match, how much the template matches the data we see. If there's a match, woohoo! We move that template, and the candidate signal forward for consideration, and continue the search, with another set of parameters.

Here's the thing though: for each unique pair of black hole masses that you pick, you will get a unique signal template out of it. No 2 mass pairs have the same template. So the best matching template gives you the source mass, and that's a unique thing. If the event was close by, it would be loud, and if it was far away it would be quieter, so by scaling the amplitude up and down to best fit the observed signal, we can get some idea of the distance. 

Unfortunately, that’s not the full story. This amplitude is also affected by which way the merger was facing. You can think about it as 2 BHs spiralling around on a disk, and it really matters whether we saw it edge on, or face on. So unfortunately, it is tricky to pin down well how far away these events came from, and that’s why the errors on these values are so large. 

However, if we can constrain the event to a signle host galaxy, we can do way better, and get loads of cool science out of it. But for a binary black hole, that's a pretty far out ask to be honest.

I hope that answers that question!

BP, continuous gravitational wave data analysis, research student, University of Glasgow

Question :About this discovery, how can you tell where the waves came from?

Also, how this will affect the current understanding of black holes and their stability?

Finally, why is Daniel Williams's name in caps? Is he a yeller?

Answer :Hi /u/cebrito,

About this discovery, how can you tell where the waves came from?

It basically works a bit like your ears determining where a sound comes from. Imagine you heard a weak sound, you know there is a sound, but you don't exactly know where the sound is coming from. But imagine a few of you heard the same sound at the same time, then all of you combine the information together, you would then have a better idea of where the sound is actually from.

In the case where we try to tell where the source of a gravitational wave signal is, we gather the information about the arrival time of the signal at various detectors together, and then we can localise the source to a certain area. This is done by comparing the arrival time of the signals at the detectors as we know that gravitational waves travel at the speed of light. The size of the error on the sky position of the source depends on how sensitive the detectors are and in which region on the sky the source is.

At the moment, we only have two detectors we are using for observations just now (the third one, Virgo, is still undergoing sensitivity improvements and will come online in the coming months) which means that the error on our estimated sky position for the source of the waves is still very large.

The plus side of this is that as we add more detectors we shrink this error and so will know more accurately where the signals come from once additional detectors (a currently-being-developed detector in Japan, KAGRA, and a planned detector in India, LIGOIndia) are switched on.

Also, how this will affect the current understanding of black holes and their stability?

The only information the gravitational wave signal gives us about black holes is there masses and their spins. This discovery gives only limited information about the spins of the merging black holes but this merger has similar masses to our first discovery, GW150914. We cannot really use GW discoveries to estimate how long-lived the black hole is. The one limit we can set on age is we can use the amplitude of the signal to estimate how far away the black hole is, and this will limit how long ago the merger happened.

Since this merger is similar in mass to GW150914 we can use these two discoveries and any future ones we make of a similar mass to narrow down how these binaries were formed. There are several competing astronomy theories of how this happens but we don't currently have enough information to rule all but one out.

Finally, why is Daniel Williams's name in caps? Is he a yeller?
He is a yeller, but only when trying to make important points about python/astronomy.

[PhD student, experimental interferometry]

EDIT: Reviewed with colleague

Question :The two solar masses that were lost to gravitational energy presumably came from inside the event horizons of the black holes. Will these waves contain a highly processed version of the information that the original mass contained when it passed the event horizons on its way into the black holes? 

Answer :No mass left the event horizon.  The energy that was released came from the potential and kinetic energy of the black holes. 

Question :Thanks for doing this AMA! I have a question about the animation of the black hole coalescence and gravitational wave generation: Are the gravitational waves only emitted in a single plane or are they emitted in all directions? 

Answer :Hi /u/shiruken,

The gravitational waves are emitted in all directions when black holes coalesce. For the purposes of visualization, we usually have to represent only the waves in a single plane (for example, the strength of the waves in the plane is usually represented by the height of the ripples visualized). Just for fun, I'll also say that though the waves are emitted in all directions, they are not emitted equally in all directions. The waves emitted perpendicular to the plane the holes orbit in are stronger than the waves emitted along the plane.

Question :Greetings from mother Russia!

1) Why only black holes? Where are grav waves from collision of neutron stars?

2) What do you think about eLISA? Will it work someday?

Answer :Greetings! Glad you could join us. One of the things I love about science is how easily it bridges time zones and international boundaries. (Though it can make teleconferences hard to schedule, sometimes! Same with AMAs, I suspect.) Let me take a crack at your questions:

(1) Part of the reason we've seen black hole mergers but no neutron star mergers is just how unexpectedly massive these black holes were. Until our first detection (GW150914) all of the "stellar mass" black holes (meaning the ones that are comparable to the mass of a typical star) were between roughly 5 and 15 times more massive than our sun. The black holes we have detected with LIGO have been as massive as 35 solar masses prior to merging, and over 60 solar masses after! These are by far the most massive stellar black holes with known mass ever observed! As a result, we can detect them at much farther distances, and it turns out these events are much more common than many of us expected. As far as neutron stars are concerned, we're still roughly on track with our expectations going into observation with LIGO. Had we been lucky, we might've detected one by now, but while our sensitivity is good, it's still at the lower end of what you'd expect to detect neutron star mergers. If we get through our current observing run and the next one, and we still haven't seen any neutron stars, then it might be time to start adjusting our expectations. (But I'm still hopeful that we're on pace.)

(2) I love eLISA! And I'm very confident that it'll work once it gets airborne (spaceborne, I guess). They had a successful start to their pathfinding mission somewhat recently, and things are looking good for the future. The great thing about LISA is that it'll sample a different (but related) portion of the gravitational wave "spectrum" (meaning it will be sensitive to different phenomena than ground-based interferometers). As a result, we'll get to observe gravitational waves from all sorts of astronomical events that we wouldn't be able to detect with LIGO. It's just like how we have telescopes for different portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. To use an analogy, LIGO will be like the high-frequency X- and gamma-ray telescopes, LISA will be like the optical telescopes, and pulsar timing arrays (another exciting frontier of gravitational wave astronomy) will be like low-frequency radio telescopes. (Though the definition of "high" and "low" frequency are very different between electromagnetic and gravitational waves.)

Thanks for your questions!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :[deleted]

Answer :The LIGO Livingston site was orginally choosen in part due to the isolation and the availability of land. 

It is also true that the population of Baton Rogue and surrounding areas has grown greatly over the last few years.

One concern would be if traffic through Livingston and on the interstate I-12 increased noticably. 

For now I don't belive it is a major concern. Current location problems that we are sensitive to  are freight trains passing though Livingston and logging in the area.

[LLO Science Fellow]

Question :Hello and thank you so much for being here to speak with us!

What is the greatest distance the LIGO can detect gravitational waves at? Are you expecting to find even further out black holes or other anomalies? 

Can you explain, for us non-physicists, how the detectors work? These discoveries are absolutely fascinating.

Thank you again, your time is appreciated.

Answer :Glad to be here!

The distance that LIGO can detect sources depends on the source itself: if the objects involved are more massive, we can detect them farther away. For some approximate numbers, at our current sensitivity we can detect binary black hole mergers like GW170104 and GW150914 out to a few billion light years. We are currently sensitive to less massive events, like binary neutron star mergers, out to a few hundred million light years. But we plan to gradually improve our sensitivity over the next few years, and hope to see a factor of 2-3 improvement in these numbers by the time we reach "design sensitivity."

As for how the detectors work, the gist is as follows:

In simple terms, the practical effect of gravitational waves moving through an object (in this case, our detector) is to cause it to alternate between being "stretched" and "squished" by a small amount. If you imagine putting two rulers together in the shape of an "L" and pass a gravitational wave through them, one ruler will shrink a little while the other will stretch, then vice versa, and so on. If you could measure the difference in lengths of those rulers, you'd be measuring the strength of the gravitational wave that caused the change!

In practice that's exactly what we do: each LIGO detector (and indeed, other gravitational wave detectors like GEO, Virgo, KAGRA, etc) is functionally a pair of rulers set in an "L"-shape. Except instead of rulers, we use lasers. Those lasers travel down each arm of the "L", bounce off of massive mirrors that can be affected by gravitational waves, then recombine. If there are no gravitational waves, then the recombined laser light perfectly cancels out and we see nothing in our detector. But when a gravitational wave passes by, one arm stretches and the other arm shrinks, which causes the laser to recombine slightly differently. Instead of seeing nothing, we see a little bit of light! The light oscillates back and forth between "some light" and "no light" and by doing very careful data analysis we can connect those changes in light to the gravitational wave that passed through.

It requires a lot of work, because a lot of other things can affect the output of our detector too. Earthquakes, electrical interference, even trucks driving down the road! Only after we meticulously filter out all of that additional "noise" do we ever claim that a signal is from a gravitational wave. It's an impressive feat, because gravitational waves are exceptionally weak. The effective change in length of one of the "arms" in our detector (each of which is 4 kilometers long) is substantially smaller than the width of an atomic nucleus! (That's somewhat of a simplification, but it gives you an idea of how sensitive LIGO is!)

So in a way, we've build the world's most accurate rulers to detect some of the universes weakest signals!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Hello from an aspiring Physicist! 

One of the big excitements of the gravitational wave detection as I understand it, is the possibility of seeing the universe through a different lens. How can we use gravitational waves to see the universe in this different way, as opposed to electromagnetism and what is the future for astronomy and gravitational waves? 

Thank you so much for this AMA!

Answer :Hello! Always happy to see a fellow physicist on these threads!

The way I like to think about it is by way of an analogy our own senses. We can see, smell, touch, and so on. Any individual sense can tell us something about an object we're perceiving, but we don't get the whole picture. If I look at an apple, I can tell what color it is, but I can't readily tell how it tastes. If I hear a car speeding down the road, I might have a sense of how fast it's going and what kind of engine it has, but I probably won't know what make and model it is unless I look at it. (Though some car enthusiasts might beg to differ.)

In that way, electromagnetic astronomy (that is, astronomy using light) is like using our eyes (literally, in some cases). We use it to see what's happening in the universe. But there are a lot of things that we can't see. What's happening inside of a star, for example? We can infer what's going on by looking at what's happening on the surface (in fact, that's part of how we know as much as we do about the interior of our sun), but we can't see it directly. Each new way of observing our universe that we develop is like adding another observational "sense".

Imagine, for example, that you're watching "The Empire Strikes Back" for the first time, but you're doing it with the sound turned off. (For those out there who haven't seen it, I encourage you to do this experiment yourself!) Our heroes have made their way to a city in the clouds, and our young protagonist is having a show down with the villainous man in black. (You might know that his name is "Darth Vader" -- but only if you're good at lip reading!) With the battle over, the man in black has backed our hero into a corner, and they are now having a conversation. Suddenly, our hero gets a look of shock and horror on his face. Clearly, the man in black just told him something important! But what was it? We don't know! The man in black is wearing a mask, and we can't see his face to read his lips!

For those of you who have seen the film, think of how much information we're missing out on by not being able to hear the dialogue in that scene.

So gravitational waves, in this analogy, are very much like our ears. We use them to "listen" to the universe, giving us access to information that our "eyes" cannot see on their own. For example, gravitational waves pass through even very massive objects almost effortlessly, so they can travel from the interior of objects (or events) almost unperturbed. Plus, they're not necessarily coupled to the emission of light. On their own, this immediately helps us by giving us access to events that we can "hear" but cannot "see." (The merging of two black holes, for example, doesn't produce enough light for us to see it! Same with so-called "dark matter".) But the real gains will come when we can use our "eyes" and "ears" together to get a bigger picture of cosmic events than we'd get from only using one of them.

This "multi-messenger astronomy" is the real future of astronomical observation. Using light, gravitational waves, neutrinos and more to develop a more and more complete understanding of the events we're observing. Gravitational waves are the next big step in that pursuit, and are set to revolutionize what we know about some of the universe's most exotic and exciting phenomena!

After all, it's thanks to them that we know that Darth Vader told Luke all about midichlorians, right? 

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Hey guys!

Thanks for the AMA!

**Main Question:** Gravitational Waves, General Relativity, Teleportation and Time Travel. (How) do these ideas inter-connect, and could there ever be any real-world applications between them?

**Extra Question:** As both of the LIGO's detectors are on the same tectonic plate, how do you rule out vibrations from with the Earth itself?

Answer :There is another interferometer for gravitational wave detection in Italy called [VIRGO that is operated by the European Gravitational Observatory](https://www.ego-gw.it/public/about/whatIs.aspx).

Question :Comparing the three recorded events thus far can you comment on the differences between them, and the similarities? Are you able to accurately point to the sources of the events? Are you able to coordinate other sensor data such as visual, infrared, UV data from space based telescopes with your event detection?

Thank you!

Question :What would need to be discovered in order for the general scientific community to accept the Big Crunch/an oscillating universe as the most accurate explanation of the cosmos?

Answer :Math does not add up, so no discovery will happen. The idea has passed. However, a 'tearing' universe creating other bubble universes is the path we may be on. Multiverse 

Question :I know it seems silly to ask but could a spacecraft ride these waves across the cosmos (in a way similar to using light sails) 

Answer :No. Gravity waves expand and contract a tiny amount of spacetime but they don't carry anything... Besides well I guess information.  The amount of mass and energy required to create measurable gravitational waves is so incredibly huge that it would make a very inefficient communication method.

Question :What are the long term goals for the LIGO project? Will an expansion of this kind of technology eventually enable us to map out the space around us via some sort of gravity spectrum instead of the electromagnetic spectrum?

Answer :Hi /u/LurkBot9000,

The long term goal of the LIGO project is to keep observing gravitational waves, while improving existing detectors and building new ones. The current LIGO detectors are not yet as sensitive as they've been designed to be. Instead, the strategy is to improve and upgrade the detectors, then let them run for a while to try to see things, and repeat that cycle every year or two until we hit the design goal. On top of this, the Virgo gravitational wave detector is turning on in Europe, the KAGRA detector is being built in Japan, and there are plans for a LIGO detector in India.

As we continue to improve the detectors and increase their number, we will see events like merging black holes more frequently and pinpoint them in space more precisely. As you say, this will allow us to explore the universe in gravitational waves, but only in a narrow range of frequencies. To get the full gravitational spectrum, we need to go even further and build gravitational wave detectors in space (look up the LISA mission for instance) or by exploit natural clocks that exist in our galaxy and can be used to detect waves (take a look at pulsar timing arrays). Over time, scientists can map out gravitational waves over many frequencies, just like seeing the universe in radio, infrared, and optical light.

Question :Hi and thanks for doing this AMA.

I was wondering if there were other sorts of phenomena could be observed with these detectors. Merging black holes obviously create a huge gravitational distortion, but what else could we potentially discover as the technology improves?

Answer :Hi /u/ScurvyRobot,

There are a number of phenomena that LIGO and VIRGO, the sister detector are currently searching for that aren't just a pair of black holes smashing together.

But first, you have to understand that gravitational waves are emitted by any mass that experiences an acceleration. This is easy to see for a pair of plack holes, they're falls inwards each other (accelerating inwards) AND being whipped around in an orbit (circular acceleration). But the waves that are emitted are pretty weak. So to have a chance of being detected we'd like it to be heavy (like black holes) or close!

The obvious next source to look for is similar - a pair of neutron stars falling in and inspiralling into each other, or a black hole and a neutron star falling together. Neutron stars are about 2 solar masses, so lighter than the black holes we've seen before, but we expect them to be pretty common in our galaxy - which is close! In fact, one of the measurements that the LIGO machines use on site is how far away LIGO could see a pair of neutron stars falling into each other. It's been pretty consistently above 50MPc (more than 150 million light years away!) - much larger than our galaxy.

This is really exciting because neutron stars are these exotic stars, and we don't really know what makes them tick. They are remnants of dead stars, the cores of supernovae, and are made up of the same stuff as the core of an atom. We don't know how that matter works in bulk, but we think it's pretty dense. Neutron stars are usually observed as pulsars - which is just basically looking at the star's northern and southern lights, so it's tricky to get information about their innards. But a direct observation of 2 such stars crashing could be pretty illuminating.

Another source we're on the look out for are supernovae - when a star is old and dies, often it starts burning through its less efficient fuel, but this is unsustainable. The pressure from the internals can't match the gravity of the star's mass, and it falls in on itself, imploding and exploding. The core is compressed into a remnant - often a  neutron star, sometimes a black hole, and the rest is thrown off of the star. If the material thrown off wasn't spherically symmetrical, it delivers a big kick and a juicy gravitational wave. This is nice because we can see stars - we're surrounded by them. If a star in our galaxy goes supernova, we can see is with our eyes, and it's close enough that we can see it with our detectors too. This could put some really nice constraints on supernova models, about the last seconds of a star's life, and on the formation of the remnants.

One more source is again about these neutron stars. We see that pulsars are rotating (it's the pulse part of pulsar). If the centre of mass was slightly off of the rotational axis, this could deliver gravitational waves. But instead of being loud and short like the other examples, these might last for a very long time - thousands of years. We can use a trick from regular astronomy here and  listen for a pulsar's periodic signal for longer and longer to try and build up signal. 

I like to use the analogy of a bucket in the rain. In torrential downpour (loud signal) you can fill your bucket to1 litre (get a detection) quickly. If you have only a little drizzle (weak signals) we would want to leave our bucket out in the rain longer (observe a source for a long time) to fill it up (detect a quiet source).

Again, with this kind of source under our belt, we could learn a lot about neutron stars - we can only see the pulsars that are pointing at us, so having a method that doesn't rely on light is super handy!

And finally, the old faithful answer for scientists: we don't know. We are open to all kind of out there things like cosmic strings, and different theories of gravity other than GR, exotic dense objects, and unmodelled things that pass through  - that's some really exciting stuff!

I hope that's answered your question!

Question :This AMA is being permanently archived by *The Winnower*, a publishing platform that offers traditional scholarly publishing tools to traditional *and* non-traditional scholarly outputs—because scholarly communication doesn’t just happen in journals.

To cite this AMA please use: [https://doi.org/10.15200/winn.149667.74231](https://www.thewinnower.com/papers/7096-science-ama-series-we-are-the-ligo-scientific-collaboration-and-we-are-back-with-our-3rd-detection-of-gravitational-waves-ask-us-anything)

You can learn more and start contributing at [*authorea.com*](https://authorea.com)


Answer :[removed]

Question :Does the detection of gravitational waves by LIGO make it easier for the BICEP2 crew to detect gravitational waves from inflation? As I understand it, the wave types from both phenomenon are different for a variety of reasons. However, does LIGOs detection help in this search?

Answer :Hi /u/ZombieHitchens2012,

Great question, and you are exactly right: experiments like BICEP/Keck, ACT, SPT and more look for the imprints of gravitational waves on the Cosmic Microwave Background, which is light from the earliest moments of the Universe than can reach us. "Inflation," which is the idea that the Universe expanded explosively in its first moments, would produce the gravitational waves these telescopes look for. Those waves are very different than the ones LIGO can detect. For one thing, they have gigantically large wavelengths, and cannot be detected by LIGO.

So there's no immediate connection between these different kinds of gravitational waves, and LIGO's successes don't help those other efforts directly. I think to see any impact, we have to take a step back. The direct detection of gravitational waves raises excitement about gravitational waves and about astronomy overall. I hope that this excitement translates into funding decisions, which do have a strong impact on whether big experiments like BICEP/Keck can succeed or even be attempted.

Question :If your planet/solar system/galaxy happened to be caught up in the collision of these black holes what would happen? Would everything be completely vaporized in an instant? Would you feel or see something coming?

Answer :No need to worry, you won't be vaporized in any of those scenarios :). 

Lets consider the situation where you're looking at a binary black hole merger within you're own solar system and you hop in your spaceship for a day trip to go see the merger (because you have nothing better to do on a Saturday). As you're watching the two supermassive objects spiral around each other, the stars around the black holes would appear to be warped due to the immensely strong gravitational field around the black holes. Black holes actually warp the very fabric of space and time, so the light traveling from the stars around the merger curve around the black holes in a process called gravitational lensing. You would see something called an Einstein ring, which is a combination of all the light in a small region around the black holes where the gravitational field has essentially smeared all of their light together. As it turns out, you would not be able to see the gravitational waves with your own naked eye. However, an incredibly neat phenomenon arises when the waves that are moving through the region where you have the Einstein ring will slosh the the stellar images of the ring around (even for a significant time after they merge together).

HG, Fulbright Scholar, Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics

Question :If I recall correctly from the first detection announcement, the displacement caused by the passing gravitational wave is miniscule. What kind of resolutions do LIGO and VIRGO have? What are the limitations on increasing that resolution to detect smaller events?

Answer :You're absolutely right, /u/shiruken! In fact, minuscule is probably an understatement. The fractional change in length of our detector for the GW170104 event was 5E-22! Which means our 4-kilometer arms were displaced by roughly 2 attometers, over a thousand times smaller than the size of an atomic nucleus! My favorite analogy is that measuring these gravitational waves is like measuring the distance to the nearest star (other than our sun) to the precision of a width of a human hair. It's almost unfathomable!

These sensitivity limits are set by a number of factors inherent to the detectors and where they're built. Being built on the ground, they're sensitive to seismic noise (earthquakes as well as regular vibrations in the ground, even those e.g. caused by trucks driving past the observatories). We use high-powered lasers, which have their own sources of noise related to the behavior of light due to quantum mechanics. Heat builds up on the mirrors we use to reflect the light, which causes small variations in our detector. And there are dozens of other things as well! By gradually improving each of these subsystems (better seismic isolation, optimizing laser throughput, improving optical coatings on our mirrors, etc) we can push our sensitivity to better and better limits. This allows us to detect events like GW170104 and GW150914 out to further and further distances. But it should also allow us to detect events involving smaller and smaller objects (like neutron stars). 

There are some tough limits to work around. For example, there is a trade off between two different sources of quantum noise from our lasers. The general understanding is that when you improve one noise source, you make the other worse. However you can do some really creative tricks (in this case, a process called "optical squeezing") that let you work around these limitations to improve sensitivity. We have dozens (nay, hundreds) of extremely talented scientists working very hard to constantly implement improvements like this into our detectors, while others are hard at work designing new ones!

Ultimately though, when you're talking about the types of events that LIGO (and by extension Virgo, KAGRA, etc) will be sensitive to there is also a fundamental limit set by the dynamics of the event itself. All detectors are only sensitive to a certain range of frequencies (for LIGO that range is very roughly 10 Hertz to 2000 Hertz, Virgo is similar). That means we are only sensitive to events that emit gravitational waves at those frequencies, which is directly related to how fast objects are orbiting/rotating. For LIGO and Virgo, this means we can only detect the mergers of "stellar mass" compact objects (meaning "small" objects like neutron stars, and black holes with masses up to several tens of times the mass of our sun). Larger objects will orbit (or rotate) too slowly, and the gravitational waves they emit will be outside of the frequency range of our detectors. Thus to detect objects like white dwarf binaries, or supermassive black holes, you will need different detectors (like the space based LISA, or pulsar timing arrays).

Though there are a lot of other phenomena that we expect to be able to emit gravitational waves in the LIGO sensitivity band beyond just neutron star or black hole mergers. Single neutron stars in our galaxy, supernovae, gamma-ray bursts and other exotic phenomena could all possibly emit gravitational waves at the right frequencies. Here's hoping they're strong enough for us to detect!

I hope this answered your question!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Does the frequency of the detection events tell us anything? Could an increase or decrease in this frequency indicate anything important about our universe?

Question :We're currently seeing the collisions of black holes because they're massive and quick. How much do we need to increase the sensitivity of our readings to see stellar collisions, such as a 1a supernova? Is that something we could do from 
Earth? And will we ever be able to detect waves from galactic collisions, which have much greater mass but take a lot longer? Are there any galactic collisions that we know of that are in progress where the black hole centers are getting close to a merger we could observe at our timescales?

Question :Congrats on the third detection! 

*Do you guys use open source software? 
*If so what language? 
*Is there a link with more info?

I have a degree in Physics and currently work in the private sector. Would be an awesome opportunity to be able to contribute!

Answer :Great question, /u/bobbywjamc! Yes, a large portion of our software is publicly available. As is some of our data! The hub for all of this is the "LIGO Open Science Center" (https://losc.ligo.org). There you can find tutorials, links to our software packages, tools for analyzing gravitational wave data yourself, and links to all sorts of ongoing projects. We encourage anyone interested in gravitational waves and data analysis to take a look and play around. LOSC > Software will get you to a good starting point.

Most of the software is written in Python or various iterations of C, though there is also quite a bit of matlab too, depending on which working group developed the code. There are several example scripts available on the LOSC, as well as links to the major python libraries and entire LSCsoft software repositories.

One of the fun projects folks can do themselves using data available on the LOSC is to use matched filtering algorithms to find the events we've detected yourself in real data! (Including this third one!) Those interested can go to the LOSC > Tutorials section to get started. 

Gravity Spy (https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/zooniverse/gravity-spy) is another way people can contribute by looking through real LIGO data and helping to classify noise "glitches" that often crop up in the detectors. This isn't quite the technical endeavor you asked about /u/bobbywjamc, but other folks who want to get involved but might not have the programming background can still help contribute!

Always glad to see interest in the technical side of things!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Is it known whether passing through more dense matter reduces energy of gravitational waves vs passung through a near vacuum?

Question :Where does this leave us re: a Grand Unified Theory?  Perhaps related: Where does this leave us re: an understanding of the particle / quantum aspect of gravity?

Question :Hello and thank you for doing this!  
Since Albert Einstein predicted the existence of gravitational waves in 1916: if you had the chance, what would you ask him?

Question :Hello! Thanks so much for the AMA. Does this tell us anything about the existence of a graviton? What are the implications of stellar-mass black holes?

Question :If I were orbiting the black hole binary system close enough, would I be able to detect the effects of the gravitational waves with my own senses?

Question :What kind of effects do gravitational waves have on time? What research is being done on it?

Question :What would be the most impactful discovery for your work in the near future? What scientific question would you like to see answered in LIGO's future?

Question :Is there any basis to the idea (in fiction) that communication through gravitational waves would have properties very different than through EM? Interstellar, various books - allowing communication between dimensions or universes.

Question :How many more do you expect to see in 2017

Answer :It's hard to say with absolute certainty. With three solid detections under our belt in a bit under a year of total observing time we've reasonably narrowed down the rate at which these events occur. But we'll need to detect a few more before we have a precise measure. Our current observing run is wrapping up at the end of this summer. Given what we know so far about binary black hole merger rates, it would be reasonable to expect anywhere between "none" to "a couple" other events between now and the end of the year.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Thank you everyone for the AMA. 

What are some challenges in increasing the sensitivity factor of detectors? What research and efforts are being carried out in this area?

Answer :Hi /u/Gskran one challenge just now is that to increase sensitivity of the detectors we need to scale up the power of the primary laser.

This is to reduce something called 'quantum shot noise' which is basically unwanted signal caused by the fact that at some moments there are more photons (particles whch light is made up of) in the detector than at others.

The problem with this 'scaling up', is that light exerts a force on objects. The more light power we have in the detector, the more it pushes on our detectors mirrors. If this happens too much, the electronic and mechanical systems controlling the detector can no longer hold it in its operating range and so will no longer be sensitive to graviational waves until these control systems are improved or the laser power is turned down. This effect is called parametric instability (in case you want to do soem further reading about it).

More long term research is being carried out for a major upgrade to Advanced LIGO. This involves running the main detector mirrors at cryogenic temperatures. Basically another type of noise we encounter when trying to measure gravitational waves is one called 'thermal noise' and is caused by molecules in the detector materials jiggling around because they have heat energy.

There is an effort to change the material the detector mirrors are made of to silicon, which will give us lower thermal noise than the currently used silica (glass, very similar to window glass but more pure). This only gives us better performance if it is run at very low temperatures (20 degrees above absolute zero I think). There are investigations ongoing into the physics of silicon mirrors, what materials we need to make the mirror surface reflective, and also the different laser frequency we need to use with these new materials (because silicon is not transparent to the laser frequency we currently use).

[PhD student, experimental interferometry]

Question :Hello, 

That's really nice to see you here!

Let's start: 

* How much data u collect per second? If it's not constant tell me min / max / avg. 

* How much time do you need to process data you collected? 

* What kind of technology (stream analytics etc.) you use? 

* Is it better to fight a hundredth horses of the size of a duck or one duck size of a horse?


Answer :Hey, thanks for your questions! I'll try to touch on each of them:

1) LIGO's base sampling rate is 16,384 Hz. Though in practice this is often re-sampled depending on the needs of a given search.

2) The time it takes to process the data depends on the type of search we're running. We have several "low latency" data analysis tools that process the data almost in real time. They're constantly running, looking for loud events in the data. Other tools work on the timescales of hours. But the "final" analyses presented in published papers are done over many different timescales, with cross-checks and refinement being done over weeks and months after the initial event.

3) To be glib, we probably have more analysis tools than we do data analysis! (Hyperbole, yes, but sometimes it feels that way.) The primary tools for these types of events (i.e. binary mergers) are "matched filtering" algorithms that look for specific families of signals in our data. But we have several other tools as well: "excess power" algorithms that just look for signals that are "louder" than you'd expect from the noise, Bayesian estimation tools to reconstruct signals and do parameter estimation, and dozens of specialized software packages each optimized for different needs.

4) I'm pretty sure the correct answer here is a hundred duck-sized horses: ducks can be nasty and I'm terrified by the prospect of fighting one the size of a horse. With that said, a horse-sized duck is pretty massive! Maybe if we fought close enough to the detectors, LIGO could see some gravitational waves from it!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Hey guys, do you have any advice for somebody who wants to get into the Interferometry field? This stuff is fascinating to me and I'd love to be a part of it  

Answer :It depends at what level you are looking to get involved, and what experience you have. 

There is certainly a lot of active research in the area of laser interferomety, focussed on making the detectors more sensitive.

Working on interferemetry for gravitational wave detection involves understanding of the lasers that produce the input light for the interometers, the suspended mirrors that form the interferometer, and electornic feedback control systems that control the detector. So ideally if you have a physics education (or are currently working on one) and have any experience or knowledge of lasers and optics that would a good staring point. It is a fascinating research area to work in.

Many reseach groups within the LIGO collaboration have experimental interferometry research groups that may be offering summer student placements and graduate research oppertunities.

[Graduate Student working on Interferometry for future Gravitational Wave Detectors]

Question :Are there any interesting or potentially useful new technologies that arose as a byproduct of the research into gravitational waves?

Question :As I understand it, the spatial displacement that LIGO is detecting amounts to something less than the "width of a proton".  

 * Is the amplitude of the displacement attenuated by distance from the event?  

 * What would the physical displacement be like if we were 1AU away from one of these black hole mergers?

 * How about really close, like 1M miles?

 * If the displacement becomes significant, say, 1mm or more, would the gravitational waves physically shred complex molecular materials apart?  (I'm thinking not because the wavelength is probably really long?)

 * Would we feel a gravitational wave that had a significant (macroscopic) physical displacement amplitude?


Question :[deleted]

Answer :Hi /u/jgstate1 I think if you just consider the discoveries we make with LIGO it is hard to see the benefit of the discovery of, say, a binary black hole merger, it is something that on first glance won't seem to affect the life of the average person. 

However, if you consider the technology that has been developed to make these detectors sensitive enough to see things like mergers, there will be an affect on more 'practical' technologies that can be used in industry.

For instance in order to isolate the mirrors used in the detectors from vibrations in the ground caused by earthquakes, people walking, wind, trains nearby,etc. many new isolation systems have been developed. Some of these sense how the ground is moving and can be adapted and used to find objects below the earth's surface or ocean beds. This could be of use in oil and gas industries, ie. might help us look for hard to find oil wells.

The materials of the mirrors themselves have also been closely investigated, as have the laser technology we use, and these could be applied in the photonics industry and in manufacturing.

For most large science collaborations like our own, there are also many more sociological benefits, ie. working with a large number of scientists from completely different countries improves cooperation across political borders.

One final point is that with new discoveries in astronomy, we find out more about how the universe itself works. I think this benefits society as whole as I think it increases our engagement with the world around us. So this would maybe be what I consider the most important point.

[PhD student, experimental interferometry]

Question :I heard you guys find a signal about once every month or month and a half.  Why are you only at 3 events now?

Answer :The problem is that our detectors are not turned on and tuned to be sensitive at all times. In a given "science run", where we try our best to maximise the time the detectors are sensitive, the detectors might only reach peak sensitivity around 60% of that time. When it gets windy, or bad weather strikes, or bad traffic passes nearby, or a strong earthquake happens somewhere on Earth, then the detectors can fall out of their highly sensitive state. At that point, it might take minutes to hours for them to become sensitive again.

When one of the detectors falls out of this sensitive state, or undergoes planned maintenance, we cannot sense gravitational waves (or, more correctly, we cannot tell if a signal in the other detector - which might still be online - is truly a gravitational wave or just a nearby truck passing or bird flying overhead with the same signal properties!). The amount of time in which both observatories are highly sensitive is only a fraction of the total time we spend in a science run. That means that, even though we've been running the detectors for longer than 3 months, we've not seen more than 3 detections.

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :I have nowhere near as much knowlegde as someone actually studying this but If space time is being stretched and crunched, does that mean clocks should be adjusted respectively or does it not matter since its based on our prespective?

Answer :Our clocks and calendars aren't relative to any external source. It's a made up fabrication that the whole of humanity agrees to because it is helpful to us - even more so now that the entire world is interconnected.

In that sense, it doesn't matter whether we adjust our clocks due to gravitation waves or not (I'm not even sure they have any effect on time) - as long as we all adjust our clocks at the same time or use some sort of unified source to adjust to. Also, more likely than not, any effect on time would affect all clocks on Earth simultaneously and to the same extent, meaning that even if our clocks were "tampered" with, they'd be all tampered to at the same time and to the same deviation, making it pretty much imperceptible to us.

Question :What is the weakest gravitational wave source that LIGO can detect? I mean, it is in the range of planetary bodies or even a small one like some accelerating mass (a train that pass nearby, two rotating weight that create a gravitomagnetic effect) . 


Thank you for your time

Answer :I'm not sure about this most recent discovery, but the second gravitational wave detection required two massive black holes of 30 and 35 solar masses, far beyond the planetary scale. 

Interestingly, the resultant black hole only measured 62 solar masses. This means that 3 solar masses worth of matter was radiated away in the process (that's a ton of radiation!). I'm not sure if all of that radiation went into gravitational waves, or if it contributed to any other process as well.

Question :What can observations like these tell us about singularities at centers of black holes?

Is there a limit to how strong a gravity wave can pass through space-time before destroying it? If yes, what would happen?

Most galaxies seem to have super sized black holes at their centers. Do you expect to observe events involving them too?

If a third black hole happened to be exactly between Earth and the two merging black holes, would we still observe the merging because gravitational waves can enter and leave the third black hole, or would we instead just see nothing happening because gravitational waves cannot leave event horizon?


Question :How far can this technology go if there was no limit in funding?   Could perhaps arrays of thousands of detectors create a 2d image of gravitational radiation in the same way as we have images of electromagnetic radiation?  

Answer :Now there's a juicy question. If we also assume there are enough trained scientists to build, commission and operate an infinite number of detectors* then indeed having many, many more detectors around the world would help a lot with determining the point in the sky from where a gravitational wave came. That would let us point conventional telescopes at that part of the sky to see if any light was emitted alongside the gravitational wave, which would let us learn even more.

However, there are diminishing returns to adding more detectors with the same sensitivity as the existing ones. It's much better to build a few, huge, extremely sensitive detectors around the planet. Indeed, the long term goal of our field is to build "ultimate" facilities in Europe and the US which would be capable of not only seeing gravitational waves at cosmological distances (i.e. sources at high redshifts), but also potentially the gravitational wave background - the gravitational wave "noise" produced by smaller sources that can't be individually resolved. It would be absolutely mind-boggling to me if we were able to build detectors capable of measuring gravitational waves so precisely, that we were limited by the noise from too many sources!

I should add that there is some interesting work from theorists in our field that suggests there is an ultimate limit to the sensitivity we are able to achieve. We are already limited by the quantum nature of light in the existing detectors (arising from Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle, i.e. that one cannot measure two different observables, such as the position and momentum of a mirror, simultaneously), so efforts are under way to develop new techniques to reduce quantum noise. However, some theory suggests that there might be an ultimate, universal limit to these techniques, that no amount of money could overcome. But we're a long way from that sensitivity - there's still plenty of money to be spent improving the existing detectors!

*There are barely enough to run the ones we have!

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :Has anyone figured out what the space time inside the event horizon might look like during the initial merger phase when the black holes start to touch?  My current understanding is the Schwarzschild metric describes space and time swapping places when inside the event horizon i.e. direction of travel in space becomes fixed, but it's possible to move on the time dimension since it's no longer fixed.  

Question :What is a gravitational wave?

Answer :Gravitational waves shrink space in one direction, and stretch space in the perpendicular direction.

The common allegory: Gravitational waves propagate through space like ripples in a pond. The ripples won't actually carry anything along with them, but rather pass underneath any object on the surface of the pond and bob it up/down in a weird way. Similarly, gravitational waves path "through" us all the time. However, the spatial distortions are so unimaginably small that they have no effect on us.

Question :I understand that these announcements come months after the detected event in order for you to thoroughly check your findings and write up all the reports etc., but how long does it take you to realize that you captured an event? Are we anywhere close to making this into a (near) real-time observation even if the signal filtering isn't 100%? How do you first get notified? Do you have software continuously searching for the build up and the merger? Or do you post-process large chunks of data every so often?

Question :How long until the joint run with VIRGO? 
It should be much easier to locate a potential optical counterpart if we can actually triangulate the part of the sky a signal came from.

Answer :Commissioners at Virgo are working hard to get the detector ready for some time towards the end of 2017. If all goes well, we hope to conduct a joint science run at that point because, as you alluded to, the ability to triangulate ("localise") the source of the gravitational wave on the sky is much better when the distance between the sites is larger, as would be the case with the addition of the Virgo detector (in Italy) complementing the US-based LIGO detectors.

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :Thanks for the AMA!

I saw an interview which unfortunately I can't remember the link of, were they talked about how it has been surprising the lack of detection of neutron star mergers by LIGO. Two questions:

1- Is this lack of neutron star mergers really a concern? What's the word on science street about it?

2- Speaking of sensitivity, the interview mentioned that signals from neutron star mergers should be plentiful with a detector 2 or 4 times as sensible as LIGO. But given how LIGO is already ridiculously sensible, what engineering steps could be possibly taken for the next generation of detectors? Built them in space? Even better noise-reduction algorithms? Moar struts? (KSP joke for those in the known) Something super sci-fi?

Thanks!

Answer :Hey /u/Oscuraga, thanks for the questions! As a neutron star enthusiast myself, I'm certainly keen to find out where all these neutron star mergers are hiding!

(1) I wouldn't say the lack of neutron star mergers is a "concern" yet. Prior to turning LIGO back on in 2015 the estimates for just how often we'd see binary neutron star mergers varied greatly. There were estimates anywhere from "once every few years" at peak sensitivity all the way up to "hundreds per year." Most people expected reality to fall somewhere in the middle, and a lack of detection up until now at our current sensitivity is consistent with that. Even if that's a little surprising, it's nothing to be concerned about quite yet! But if we get to the end of our third observing run (we are currently in our second) and we have still not seen any neutron-star mergers, that's when we our expectations will start to be in tension with our observations. 

(2) Right now we're sensitive to binary neutron star mergers out to a few hundred million light years. There is a detailed plan to improve that by a factor of 2-3 on our way to "design sensitivity" over the course of the next few years. In between observing runs (and during regular maintenance) our exceptionally talented instrumentalists work hard on integrating new technologies into the detectors, eliminating sources of spurious noise, and a host of other things to improve sensitivity. Beyond the current generation of ground based detectors (which includes LIGO, Virgo, GEO, KAGRA as well as other planned detectors such as LIGO-India) there are also plans to build a detector in space. The LISA project was recently successful in their "pathfinding" mission (while we're making video game jokes, no, this one did not go to Andromeda). They are on track for eventually building a detector in space (though it will be different to different types of objects than the ground-based interferometers). There are also projects underway to use very precise measurements of pulsars to measure the effects of gravitational waves using so-called "pulsar timing arrays." So there are a lot of paths to improve our ability to detect gravitational waves!

But of course, all of that is moot, because the solution is always more struts, right?

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :What is the distance a gravitational wave can travel? With an expanding universe, and the sheer amount of objects that could cause these waves it seems like we would be getting them more frequently. 

Answer :Ostensibly gravitational waves can travel indefinitely. The problem is that the further away from the source the gravitational wave gets, the weaker it becomes. To be precise, the part of the gravitational wave that we are sensitive to (its amplitude) is inversely proportional to the distance from the source. This sets a limit on how close a source needs to be in order for its gravitational waves to be strong enough to detect when they get to us, and it helps explains why we don't detect them more frequently.

(Note that the fact that we're sensitive to gravitational wave amplitude is in contrast to how we detect light. We detect light based on its flux, or brightness, not its amplitude. So while our ability to detect gravitational waves falls off as the inverse of distance, our ability to detect light falls off as the inverse of distance squared. Just an interesting little tid-bit related to your question!)

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :How much (roughly) of the  Strong-Field regime of General Relativity do these discoveries confirm? (eg I assume linearised GR models would not be able to explain these observations)?

Answer :Hi, /u/escherbach, and thanks for the question,

Well, our simulations come from numerical relativity, which in these strong field regimes is very computationally expensive. By using the outputs of these models as our signal templates, we are probing the strong field of GR directly. As our observations haven't deviated from GR, we can't say that GR is 'right' or 'wrong', only that it continues to be the least wrong theory for gravity we have yet.

That's about as close to proving GR right that we can get with LIGO. Often with theories like this, there is no way to prove something as 'right', but we can show that our observations match predictions made by our theories. By testing the theories in more and more ways, we can continue to show consistency between the two, or we can find an inconsistency between theory and observation.

So long as we aren't proving it wrong, then its the best descriptor we have!

I hope that this answers your question!

BP, Continuous  gravitational waves, Research student, University of Glasgow

Question :How could I surf gravitational waves?

Question :I just finished a presentation on your first discovery of GW, but I received a question about how the relative delay between the two detectors was 6.9ms even though the light travel time was 10ms. I wasn't able to answer the question, so I was wondering if you have an explanation for that.

Answer :The light travel time "as the crow flies" between the detector sites is indeed 10ms. However, remember that the gravitational wave does not necessarily have to travel along the line connecting the two sites, it can also travel in such a way that it hits both sites at the same time (if it were at 90 degrees to the imaginary line connecting the two sites). So, a gravitational wave can have a delay anywhere between 0 and 10ms in arrival between the two sites. In fact, we can use the delay we measure between the sites to help work out from where in the sky the gravitational wave came from!

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :What scope is there to optimise the LIGO detectors or the next generation?   Physical size,  resolution,  sensitivity, cost are some of the typical targets for improvements.   

Do we have orders of magnitude improvements waiting, do we know where things can be improved or are these all unknowns.

Also, would more detectors globally give us more insight?

Answer :Increasing the laser power is one way in which the sensitivity of the detectors can be improved. The laser light is used to probe the position of the test masses. It is the position of these test masses that is changed very slightly by a gravitational wave. By increasing the amount of power in the probe beam you increase the size of the signal induced by gravitational waves relative to the sensing noise. Sensing noise or 'shot noise' Is casued by a variation in the number of photons in the probe beam. The signal-to-noise ratio increases with increased laser powers as the number of photons in the beam increases. 

To increase the laser power a laser amplifier is being used at LIGO Hanford to increase the input laser power from 22W to 30W. After the end of the current observing run the plan is to increase the laser power to 70W. The final upgrade to aLIGO will have a input laser power of more than 200W, to achieve the design sensitivity.

Another improvement can be made to reduced the shot noise of the measurement. A technique known as squeezed light injection is a quantum enhancement technique that can reduce 'shot noise'. Squezeed light injection will be implemented at LIGO Livingston at the end of the current observing run.

Looking further ahead, the sensitivity of gravitational wave detectors can be improve by cooling the detector to reduce the thermal noise and improve the sensitivity. The KAGRA detector is a cryogenic gravitatioanl wave detector that is currently under construction in Japan, and there are plans to run the LIGO detectors as cryogenic interferometers after the end of the advanved LIGO observing runs. The addition of other detectors, such as KAGRA and Virgo, will help to triangulate the source of the gravitational waves.

To look even further ahead, by operating gravitational wave detectors underground (Einstein Telescope, Cosmic Explorer) or in space (LISA) we can better isolate the detectors from seismic noise.

Question :Wooo!! I don't have a question but I love your work!

Question :After your first ama I asked what the expected rate was and I was told you expect Ed to see one a month is that what we are seeing?


Also we have two detector. What happens if we get More?  Is there phase or spin info u would like to get?

Question :Are tours available of the Livingston facility?

Answer :Hi /u/ActiveMeasures, we do offer tours, on the third Saturday of every month! https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/LA/page/Science-Saturdays

Question :So far, all three confirmed GW signals have been from mergers of pretty heavy black holes (astrophysically speaking), all about 20-30 solar masses. It's my understanding that the vast majority of astrophysical black holes should be comparable to a solar mass due to their formation from the collapse of a star (and the Chandrasekhar limit). Why hasn't LIGO seen any events like these yet? Is it some sort of detection bias (heavier binaries release more energy and thus are more detectable), or perhaps the characteristic frequency of lighter mergers are outside the detector's sensitivity range? Or do lighter binaries merge more slowly, reducing the event rate (i.e. final parsec problem)? Or do you think this may be a clue that dark matter is ~30 solar mass primordial black holes?

Question :While the gravitational waves that have been detected are all incredibly tiny when they reach Earth after having traveled millions of light years through space, circa how big must they have been "near" the black holes when they merged? I wonder if at some distance to the event (eg. 1 AU), the wave would make a visible distortion against the background sky. Sort of like how gravity itself lenses light, but in a dynamic way. 

Question :These gravitational waves come from the interaction of two black holes.

But how can black holes be close like the ones that are creating the waves ? I mean, do you have an idea about how did they get here ?

Question :I was looking at the RAW data of the LIGO detectors.

For people who are interested, here is [GW in 2017](http://i.imgur.com/sWYbroX.jpg) and the [GW in 2015](http://i.imgur.com/TyDIEHl.jpg).

My first impression is that there is a big disturbance caused 
by a resonating signal of variable amplitude. 
This resonance seems caused by how the LIGO system is setup.

After reading its documentation, I noticed that it
reuses its laser by recycling (after following a path of 1120km). 
Also the interferometer appears to be a mirror.
Both appear to cause enormous echoes.

Based on the data I think that the base frequency would be
268 Hz (=c/1120km).  
If we add the interferometer (path becomes 2x1120 km)
and the amplitude modulation, we get much lower frequencies.
This all gets close to the frequencies of the signals that you want to find.

What methods did you use to filter out the echoes in the system?


Question :Can the wave equation be used to model gravitational waves, or is there a different equation specific to them?

Question :If a gravitational wave warps space, doesn't it warp the space comprising your measuring device? How can you measure a thing that's varying in the same way your caliper is?

Answer :Curvature of spacetime is an "intrinsic" geometric property, which means you are supposed to see its effects by measurements within spacetime. One example is the moon orbiting the earth as a result of earth warping spacetime. An intuitively accessible analogue is the curvature of earth's surface, which can be detected by measuring distances or angles on the surface.

Question :Were there good estimates of the frequency of black hole collisions before LIGO? How did they work? When will LIGO have enough data to compare against these estimates? If/when the old estimates are shown to be wrong, how might those old models be improved?

Question :As an aspiring physicist, I'm delighted to have this opportunity!

Do you believe gravitational waves may help us in our journey of uniting quantum field theory with gravity? 

Which areas of physics do you think will be hot in the next couple decades?

Question :Thanks for doing this AMA! 

Do you think when the James Webb telescope is launched it will be able to benefit your research? If so do you think you will be able to get any time on it?

Answer :In principle, yes! James Webb, along with other telescopes such as Hubble, look at the electromagnetic spectrum, i.e. light. Gravitational waves are not light, but we know that some predicted sources of gravitational waves may emit light as well. We have set up a system of automated alerts which quickly assess whether a candidate gravitational wave is significant, and if it is, it sends an email to astronomers running telescopes all around the world. If they can slew their telescopes to the part of the sky we predict the gravitational wave came from, they might be able to catch a glimpse of the light that was emitted alongside the gravitational wave. We call this process "EM follow-up".

James Webb could in theory be used for EM follow-up. However, space-based telescopes are extremely expensive to run - so I am sure James Webb will have a busy schedule to study particular objects in the sky and will not take time to look for EM counterparts to gravitational waves. There's always the chance that James Webb or Hubble happens to be looking at the same part of the sky that a gravitational wave comes from, though, in which case it might see something!

One last remark to make is that the three detections we've made so far have been from black holes. Unfortunately, it seems that black holes don't emit EM radiation when they emit gravitational waves, so EM follow-up has not proven fruitful. However, EM partners will keep looking, and there's always the chance we see a new source (such as neutron star binaries) from which we think there's a better chance of EM emission. That would allow us to test whether gravitational waves really travel at the speed of light!

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :I was watching a veritasium channel video on YouTube and it was said that "we were expecting a lot of neutron star mergers" . If you can briefly explain what  some of the other expectations are and what the reasoning behind them is that will be really nice. As a follow up is their any time period where you expect there to be more activity. Were you expecting this frequent detection. 

Answer :In a lot of ways, LIGO was built with neutron star mergers in mind. That's not to say it wasn't also designed to detect other things, but many people felt that neutron star mergers would be LIGO's bread and butter, as it were. The fact that we haven't seen any (yet!) is actually still consistent with our expectations going into our observing runs (we are in the middle of our second observing run). If by the end of our third observing run we still haven't seen any, that's when our observations will start to be in tension with expectation.

Actually, it surprised a great many people (in our own community and otherwise) that our first detection was a binary black hole merger. Not everyone was surprised of course, there were a number of talented scientists who had been studying the prospects of binary black hole mergers for years. But I think had you asked most LIGO scientists before the first discovery to put money on what we were going to detect first, they would've said binary neutron stars.

Part of the reason for that is because we see a lot of binary neutron star systems in our own galaxy. They're a long way off from merging themselves, but they're out there, and they're emitting gravitational waves. In fact, a Nobel prize was given for the discovery of the orbital decay of the Hulse-Taylor binary system: a pair of neutron stars whose orbit was shown to be decaying via gravitational wave emission (this was the first indirect evidence for the existence of gravitational waves). Extrapolating what we see here in our galaxy out into the rest of the local universe suggested we should see a lot of these things merging. And like I said, we still might! (In fact, were I a betting man, I would bet that we probably will!)

But the rate of black hole mergers was a bit tougher to pin down going into our observing runs. By their nature, black holes don't emit much light (they themselves emit none, though the material around them might). So likewise, pairs of binary black holes don't emit much light either. As a result, it was hard to get an estimate of how many were out there! Now that we're detecting them with LIGO, we realize these events were much more common than anticipated!

As for when there will be more activity? Well, there is a plan in place to gradually improve LIGO's sensitivity over the next few years. And during that time, more gravitational wave detectors will come online for more observing runs (starting with Virgo this summer!). The more detectors we get, and the more sensitive they become, the more events we will see. Once LIGO reaches design sensitivity, we hope to be seeing greater than an order of magnitude more events than we're seeing now, including classes of events we haven't seen yet! (Not the least of which should be some neutron star mergers!)

Suffice to say we're a the very beginning of an exciting time in astronomy.

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :I know three detections is a small sample size, but are y'all detecting more or less than expected? Could these be primordial black holes? Dark matter candidates? Any time frame on new detectors coming online that could provide, um I guess, a greater resolution on these events? Will you be able to detect mergers, or collisions, of less massive objects at smaller distances (like neutron stars within our own galaxy)? Also, how soon until you catch an event with conventional telescopes AND gravitational data?

Question :Does the ubiquity of small black holes explain the Fermi Paradox?  Are we due for a small black hole driveby which wipes us out?

Question :You guys are awesome! This whole opperations is unfathumable! 

Love you all.

My question: Do gravitational waves exhibit a doppler shift? 

Answer :Hello, /u/tip-top-honky-konk

The answer to your question is - yes! My own research is based about continuous gravitational waves from rotating neutron stars. These, we think, are always emitting, and emit quasi-monochromatically - which means almost at a fixed frequency. However, when we search for them, we have to modulate the frequency of the signal to account for the Doppler shift of:


The observatory rotating with the Earth (1 day period)
The Earth going around the sun (1 year period)


For shorter signals, these Doppler shift terms aren't really all that relevant, as the time scales are so short. But they certainly have to be taken account of for longer signals.

I hope that has answered your question!

BP, continuous gravitational waves, Research student, University of Glasgow

Question :Now that the existence of gravitational waves do for us going forward? In what ways will this effect the average persons life going forward?

Answer :> Now that the existence of gravitational waves do for us going forward?

This is a strangely worded question, but I believe you're asking about applications? For one example, gravity and gravitational waves can pass through matter unobstructed. A "gravitational wave telescope" could see right through physical objects that are blocking our view, and would not require any sort of external presence like visible light. This is a looooong way away from implementation, though.

> In what ways will this effect the average persons life going forward?

It won't, in the near future.

Question :Can you explain what happens, kind of like a play-by-play, at the time the black holes collide?

Question :When will we have the tech to quickly determine the exact position (and thus photos) of gravitational wave events?  Are there plans to coordinate with JWST/Hubble/VLT/etc. to produce near real-time photos of the events?

Answer :I posted an answer regarding the use of JWST alongside our gravitational wave detectors here: https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/6fekz5/science_ama_series_we_are_the_ligo_scientific/dihz2mw/

We already have technology to predict from where in the sky each gravitational wave came from. We look at the time (and phase) between the signals arriving at each of the LIGO sites. This allows us to guess which part of the sky the signal came from, but this has a very large error and we can only localise the source to a few tens of square degrees - a huge area. Few telescopes can map such a large part of the sky quickly enough to identify the source of the gravitational wave. In the future, when Virgo and KAGRA join the worldwide network of detectors, our estimates about the sky position of events will get much better and allow us to give much better estimates to our astronomer colleagues, giving them a much better chance of seeing some electromagnetic emission from the source of the gravitational waves.

A real-time photo of a gravitational wave event... now there's an exciting prospect! I wonder what it'll look like?

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :With the current atmosphere in the US towards science and scientists being...ahem...less than ideal, are you concerned at all about the future of these projects under the current administration?

Question :Does 2 gravitational waves collide and create interference pattern just like normal waves do? If so, how do we differentiate such kind of interference gravitational waves with normal gravitational waves? 

Question :When are you going to be able to use devices like LIGO to look at the beginning of time?

Question :Hey there!  The AMA is much appreciated!

In your work, have you found evidence - or even clues - that blackholes are, in fact, two dimensional holograms?  

Question :I am extremely excited about the new data all of your group have been working with!  

**My question is:  Do these gravitational waves travel at the speed of light?**

I've always wondered about this scenario where our Sun just disappears into another dimension.  Would Earth's vector in space change at the same time as we go dark?

I have an antique astrophysics book my parents had laying around and it is very interesting to compare what has changed in our understanding of the universe (especially its infancy) since "The Whole Shebang" was written way back when I was in 2nd grade.

Thank you!

Question :Hi, thank you all for this AMA! I attended a national event in France about gravitational waves (12 different cities held conferences at the same time), pretty interesting stuff! Here are my two questions for you:

* Does the number of detections you've made so far follow what you expected to see?

* Also, I know some tricks you have to separate the noise from the signal (the main one being the distance between the two detectors), but have you had a moment when you didn't understand the shape of the signal? (for example from a noise source you did not think of initially).

Question :What was your reaction when gravitational waves were first discovered?

Question :In the foreword of "The Ascent of Gravity", Marcus Chown describes the discovery of Gravity Waves as the most important discovery since the invention of the telescope. That seems a little hyperbolic, but is he right, and why?

Question :Will we ever be able to use gravitational waves as a means of communication? I cannot take credit for the idea, it's a concept from the 'Three Body Problem' series by Cixin Liu (amazing sci-fi series with the most imaginative concepts I've seen in a long time).

Question :Are there any practical uses for gravity waves? What can we do now that we know they exist? 

Question :Hello, guys. I'm personally very interested with your work and the implications of the recent detections. More interesting, though, is that I've heard some of you went through detection drills. Namely, how injected readings were fabricated and you guys were essentially in the dark about the veracity of that information. How did that experience prepare you for the subsequent non-bogus detections? What can other scientists from super-sensitive detection field learn from this? 

Question :I read these detectors are so sensitive they could be triggered by a lightning flash on the other side of the planet. How do you guys make sure what you're reading is created by the black holes merging, and not some thunderstorm across the globe? 

Answer :To my understanding there are two places at different parts of the earth. That way they can tell if what they detected is from something on earth.

Question :Assuming gravitational waves are a decent % slower than light, how much more of the early universe would we be able to check out?

Question :Wow you guys are great! 

"What's the next step, would it also be possible for making gravity physically visible around smaller objects than two colliding black holes? 
Like our own solar system or just the Sun.

Seeing all the gravity waves would be so great.


Question :Something that has been a recent fascination of mine is what space-time is made out of (if anything) which allows gravitational waves to propagate through it. We've all seen the illustrations of planets and stars making dents in a fabric of space-time or demos of a bowling ball on a sheet of fabric, but I've always wondered how the interactions of mass and space-time were taking place. Whether 'empty' space was actually made out of something which is distorted/compressed by mass, or if particles were being exchanged, or something else.

Is there research currently going on to help us understand more about space-time and how it interacts with mass?

Could you suggest any material to read up on this subject?

Question :What can the LIGO experiments tell us about the intrinsic strength of gravity across large and short distance scales? 

Question :As I understand, you send a split laser down two long vacuum courses, bouncing the signaloff inertially stabilized mirrors then measuring the phase shift.  To pick up fainter waves you might extend the length of the arms of the instrument.  Why not bounce the laser back and forth several times along each arm before measuring the phase shift?

Answer :Short answer: This is more or less what we do do. 

In fact we do it in three ways:

1) The laser light is split into two beams that travel along two 4km long vacuum 'arms.' There is one mirror at the start and one mirror at the end of each arm. The laser light if reflected back and forth over a hundered times in each arm as the two mirrors form an optical resonator.

2) The two beam are then recombined, the lengths of the two arms is held so that the two beams are in phase when they recombine. Because the light is in phase all the light is sent back along the input path. Another mirror is place in the input path to reflect the beam back into the instrument, this increases the power inside the detector, and is known as 'Power Recycling.'

3) The gravitational wave changes the relative length of the two arms and therefore induces a phase shift on the light that is recombined. This means that not all of the light goes back along the input path but instead goes to the output where the signal is detected. Another mirror can be placed in the output can reflect the signal beam back in the interferometer again, this increases the size of the signal relative to the detector nosie and is known as 'Signal Recycling'

So yes, we do bounce the beam back and forth in different ways, and this 'recycling' is one of the key sensitivity imporvements that made the aLIGO detections possible. 

[LIGO Science Fellow / University of Glasgow PhD Student]

Question :Is it true that gravitational waves move faster than the speed of light? How does this enhance our knowledge of space and time?

Answer :Hi /u/gingersnagagram,

No, nothing is faster than light! It's a central part of General Relativity, which predicts gravitational waves, that nothing can travel faster than light.

We think that gravitational waves travel at the same speed as light - but we don't yet have very good constraints on that yet. If the graviton is masslesss, which we think it is, then they have to travel at light speed. If they aren't massless though, then conceivably, gravitational waves could travel slightly slower than light. 

Just not faster

I hope that this has answered your question!

BP, continuous wave data analysis and LIGO Fellow, Research student, University of Glasogw

Question :Hi thank you for the AMA!

I remember listening to a TED talk earlier in the year that played the 'sound' of two black holes colliding. So my question is how do gravitational waves translate into sound? Is it a good way for laypeople like myself to understand the findings?

Answer :Hi /u/subversivecat, and thanks for the question.

When it comes down to making the GW signals into sound, it's down to the data that we take.

LIGO sits there, always taking data. The data that really interests us is called strain - the relative change in arm length. At any given moment, this is just a number, so you can plot it out through time. If you look at any sound editing software, the sound going through each ear is also just a number for any given moment in time, and can similarly be plotted out.

Like this (random image I googled) : http://www.dexster.net/img/dexster-audio-editor.jpg

Unfortunately, if you just turn the detector output during an event into sound, it's messy. The signal is only in a small portion of the entire frequency band, and while the noise levels at the source frequency are relatively low, it's nasty at other frequencies. You've got these lines in the spectrum, where noise sources with fixed frequency put in large contributions to the overall sound, and end up sounding like metallic violins. We have the bass tones from the 60Hz electricity supply, the low-mid tones of the 500Hz suspensions vibrations, and all of their harmonics. So we remove all of these nasty lines, and apply a bandpass filter, to get rid of all the unwanted high and low frequency stuff. 

That leaves us with a band usually from about 100Hz to maybe 1000Hz, where the signal is much much easier to hear.

I personally think that being able to hear GWs is a great way to be engaged with the science - as you can't see them or feel them, it seems the easiest way to intuit what the resulting signals from great big cosmic events are like! 

I hope that's answered your question.

BP, Continuous wave data analysis, Research student, University of Glasgow

Question :Is there a theory as to how these waves effect matter on an atomic scale?  As in, if ordered matter/atomic bonds were too close to the source (ignoring other destructive energy effects) would gravitational waves break chemical bonds or otherwise have an effect that would last after the waves had passed?

*As an example, a [C-C] (http://www.science.uwaterloo.ca/~cchieh/cact/c120/bondel.html) bond is 154 picometers and has a bond energy of 348kJ/mol or 5.78x10^-19 joules per bond.  

Answer :That's a great question!  I don't think gravity waves could break chemical bonds. Gravity is like super weak man.

Question :My Question:

Are ya suuurrreee?

To expand and make that less dumb:

Can you talk about how you filter out noise. 

LIGO is so sensitive you're bound to have a ton of noise. How you know it was the merger of two black holes and not say, a big truck driving by, or even a nearby pair of stars colliding?

Answer :Yep, we're pretty sure! But it's great that you ask! 

Going from initial detection to "this is a gravitational wave" is a long and involved process, and you're right to be skeptical. We certainly are! As soon as an event registers in our data analysis pipelines, we immediately ask ourselves questions like "could this have been an earthquake? what about electrical interference? is some kid throwing rocks at the detector again?" These questions continue for weeks and months, until we have exhausted every possible explanation we can think of. Only then do we conclude that an event was likely astrophysical.

If this sounds like a long and arduous process, it's because it is. Our signals are so weak, and we have a lot of sources of noise, that we have no choice but to be thorough. But to help with this, in addition to the primary "data" channel (which is where our gravitational wave signals live), LIGO has over 200,000 auxiliary channels that monitor everything from environmental conditions to instrument behavior. Many of these auxiliary channels are not sensitive to gravitational waves, so if we see a signal in one of them we know that it wasn't astrophysical. Likewise, we have dozens of talented scientists and engineers that scrutinize the outputs of these channels to rule out environmental or instrumental noise.

(A fun fact related to this: you can use LIGO data to measure how fast trucks are going over the speed-bumps on roads near the detectors -- I'm pretty sure that got someone in trouble for speeding once.)

Beyond using hardware to scrutinize potential noise sources, we also use software. We employ a large family of "vetoes" that we use to reject things that look like signals but probably aren't. For example, if a signal appears in one detector but not the other, then there's a decent chance it wasn't astrophysical in origin and we would usually veto it. Beyond that, we employ all sorts of digital signal processing tools (band-pass filtering, and so on) to help prevent contamination from other noise sources. We even make every attempt to cross-check with different data analysis tools to make sure it wasn't an artifact of the search technique. (After taking into account the statistical biasing that can occur when you do so, of course!)

Then, once we're convinced that the event is truly astrophysical, we evaluate what type of gravitational wave signal it was. Different events produce different types of signals, and while there is some overlap, you can start to quickly rule things out. For example, if you know the total mass of a merger (say, 50 solar masses or so) and you know how quickly they were orbiting when they merged (which you get from the gravitational wave frequency) you might be able to rule out that a neutron star was involved. Likewise, other signals (e.g. the gravitational waves from a supernova) can be ruled out because they would look different than the signal we see. Not all detections we make will always have a clear source, however binary mergers (like the black hole mergers we've seen so far) are quite distinct and difficult to reproduce with other mechanisms.

And by the time all is said and done, we've hopefully found a gravitational wave event that we can identify! This long process is in party why it takes so long to go from discovery (in this case, January 2017) to publication and announcement (June 2017).

But it is phenomenally important that we remain unbiased when we're searching for these events. We're in an exciting new era of astronomy, and we cannot get ahead of ourselves. That's why we remain dedicated to being as diligent as humanly possible while distilling our results, and eventually presenting them to the public.

I hope this helps!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Thank you for the AMA! I'm really fascinated by this research as a high school student and I hope you could answer my dumb question (and I also apologize for any grammar mistakes since I'm not a native speaker):

Let say we have a close enough merger of 2 mass black holes without messing up with the machines and destroy our planet, how big the gravitational waves can be? Would it be significantly bigger or.. not even bigger than what you've been detected?

Question :Does your research on gravitational waves have any effect on the existence or knowledge of gravitational particles (gravitrons)?

Question :What new discoveries/innovations could be made from these recent discoveries?

Question :I just want to say thank you for coming to my school! Specifically Michael Landry

Question :Do these three detected waves have the same origin? Could they come from different collisions of black holes? How do you determine where a wave is coming from?
Also, could there ever be a gravitational wave so big that humans would be able to feel it?

Question :How do gravitational waves affect the local topology? What sort of effects would someone close to them experience physically?

Question :Are the simulations to scale wrt angular velocity? And how do you determine the size of black holes which merged and the distance from earth?

Question :What's the best way to explain to a mongoloid flat-earther the difference between gravitation and electromagnetic force? 

Question :I've always had an interest in interferometers thanks to childhood science fiction.  I've paid a little attention since early 2000s to LIGO announcements/documentary.   I'm curious what technology has changed that is suddenly allowing more precise timing measurements, or is the advancement in background noise removal?

Question :Is the combination of two black holes similar in anyway to a fusion reaction? 

Question :What is the next step?  Where do we see this information leading us technology-wise?  Do we see this technology getting smaller?

Answer :Collaborators within the international network are continually working to further enhance the sensitivity of gravitational wave detectors. Improved sensitivity means that we will be able to detect more signals and extract better astrophysics. In terms of sources, we will see a larger population of black hole binaries, whilst also observing black hole-neutron star binaries, and neutron star-neutron star binaries. Pushing the limits of hardware development is leading to improvements across the entire sensitivity region of gravitational wave detectors from around 10Hz-a few kHz (i) at low frequencies (10-50Hz) better suspensions systems allow the suspenion of heavier test masses, meaning that photons do not have such an impact on the motion of the mirrors (radiation pressure noise) (ii) the development of novel new mirror coatings will reduce the thermal noise of the instrument (around 100Hz-200Hz), whilst also reducing the amount of power absorbed onto the mirror coatings which can cause issues with thermal distortion/lensing (iii) at high frequencies (kHz), we can either increase the laser power to improve the detector sensitivity, or utilise a clever approach called squeezing. 

We will be  using all of these techniques to provide enhancements to the LIGO facilities. For the longer term, cryogenic detectors offer the opportunity to further reduce thermal fluctuations (thermal noise) by reducing the tempertaure. KAGRA in Japan is already under construction and this will operate with sapphire test masses at 20K. In the US there is work ongoing on LIGO Voyager which may operate at 120K (room temperature if 298K) with Silicon test masses, or Cosmic Explorer which may utilise arms of 40km (aLIGO is 4km). In Europe, the Einstein Telescope proposes arm lengths of 10km and both a room temperature and cryogenic instrument.

For interferometers longer is better, as we are measuring a strain in spacetime. Increasing the baseline means smaller strains can be measured.

Question :How do gravity waves affect objects in space?  Are there any visible effects?

Question :Not a question but this is funny and pisses me off because you guys announced the third detection the day after my science fair, and my project was on gravitational waves haha

Question :What can we infer from the data so far about the frequency of occurrence of BHs of various sizes? I've heard that ones seen are not of the expected size distribution, and this may have implications for the search for dark matter. 


Question :How close is humanity to creating artificial gravitational waves? How much energy and what type of technology would you need to produce something like this?

Question :How far are you from being able to triangulate the signal in the sky and relay this information in near real time to other telescopes/observatories so they can train their instruments to interesting phenomena in the sky?

Question :I've heard somewhere that black holes were meant as a less likely detection compared to neutron star formation, why is it that several black hole formations with enough significance were recorded and no neutron star signals?

Question :Can the detector be miniaturised? Is it possible to make something that home users could set up to crowd source data?

Answer :When we descibe the sensitivity of a detector we often describe the 'strain' sensitivity, the sensitivity to the small length changes in the detector induced by a gravitational waves scales with the length of the detector. 

The LIGO detectors have 4km long 'arms' that sense the gravitationa wave strain. So to produce a detector that could comfrotably fit inside your home you would need to make it 1000 times more sensitive.

How ever if you are interesting in looking at gravitational wave data at home, have a look at another answer given about open source data https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/6fekz5/science_ama_series_we_are_the_ligo_scientific/dii5pt3/

And you might be interested in Gravity Spy a way in which home users can look though actual gravitiation wave data and help us help classify noise 'glitches' in the data. https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/zooniverse/gravity-spy

[LLO Fellow/PhD Student]

Question :So what you're saying is, gravity is real. What do you say to the naysaying scientists?

Question :How do you know that what you're detecting is a gravitational wave?

Question :Can your detections tell us anything about the density of black holes in the universe? If so, what might we learn from that?

Question :Is there anything interesting to say about the space between the black holes at the time of the merger or right before?

Question :I was surprised that in two years of operation you've detected three black hole merger events. That feels like a lot. I didn't think binary black holes were common to begin with, let alone binary mergers. Does this tell us something about the frequency of this type of system and event overall?

Question :Have or do we expect to detect mergers inside this galaxy? 

Do nearby or properly oriented mergers or other GW events pose any significant threat, like gamma ray bursts of supernovae? 

Thanks! 

Question :In one of your answers, you mention that your (4km) detectors change length by "barely a couple attometers -- a thousand times less than the diameter of an atomic nucleus." It strains credulity to believe that we are capable of such a feat! I know you don't have all day, but how have you been able to accomplish that? Tell us about how the design, engineering, computation, etc. all work together to get such a fantastic capability!

Answer :I'm also still amazed that we can obtain such sensitivity, too!

One reason why we can do this is that we use light as our "ruler" to measure strain in space-time. Because light is a wave (and a particle, but let's not get into that), it can interfere with other light. We send lots and lots of laser light into the arms of our L-shaped detector, and bounce it off the ends of each arm. When the light returns back to the start, it interferes with the light coming back from the other arm. We use our control systems to hold the lengths of each arm exactly such that the light that interferes at the start interferes destructively. That means, during normal operation, we don't get any light leaving the detector at the output - instead, it all heads back towards the input. But, when a gravitational wave passes (or anything that looks like a gravitational wave - such as certain types of unwanted noise), the light at the output no longer interferes destructively, but rather constructively. The light then leaves the detector at the output, which we can sense with a light detector. That's our signal! All it takes is a heck of a lot of light.

Of course, it's much more complicated than just injecting loads and loads of light. We also have to make sure that the ground motion - created by people, cars, planes, earthquakes, the Moon, waves hitting the shores on beaches thousands of miles away - is suppressed by a huge amount on its way to the optics that form the detector. That's why we suspend our mirrors from multiple stages of pendulums. Each pendulum we use provides isolation at higher frequencies, such that we can be more sensitive to gravitational wave signals at those frequencies. By stacking multiple pendulums on top of each other, we can get more and more isolation for our mirrors at higher frequencies. This allows our mirrors to suspend freely, with very little influence from the microscopic motion of the ground it ultimately sits on. That means that, when a gravitational wave comes past, we are able to sense the motion of the optic by the change in the amount of light that reaches the output of the detector - and we can be quite sure that it's not just ground motion that's moving the mirror.

In terms of our controls, we use a system that we developed in-house called "CDS". It runs in real time, so signals sensed on various detectors within the observatory can be fed into the control loops and decisions can be made very quickly to correct the motion of the mirrors. There are a huge number of channels recorded by this system (hundreds of thousands). While most of these are only passively monitored and recorded, some are involved in very fast decision making. For example, if our mirrors drifted apart due to someone jumping up and down next to the detector, our control system would immediately see that the optic is moving and therefore apply a correction with magnetic actuators on the pendulum system from which the mirror is suspended. Sometimes the mirrors move so much that our actuators are not able to fully correct their motion, and so we lose sensitivity and have to wait until the mirrors calm down again (that's one reason why we aren't able to collect data 24/7).

Because our actuators are still quite strong, we are able to damp the residual motion of our mirrors down to attometers or lower. That means that we are able to sense gravitational waves at that kind of resolution. It has taken research over the past 50 years to develop technology capable of that kind of sensitivity.

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :this is kind of a unrelated question here, but it still applys to space. anyways, will dark matter ever be controllable? and how long will it be before we can reliably use nuclear fusion instead of nuclear fission? thanks 

Question :Hey guys! Cardiff University Physics graduate here. Just wondering what your opinions are about Stephen Fairhurst? He was my undergrad tutor and I can't think of anything else to ask you guys. 

Question :Are there any hypothetical/conceptual/imaginary methods, devices, equations etc. that might lead to being able to generate or manipulate gravitational forces?

Question :What is your favorite color please?

Question :The illustrations I've seen of black holes colliding make it look like the end of the event occurs when the spheres merge. Do the spheres illustrate the event horizons? Would the singularities be smaller in diameter than the spheres, and wouldn't the event end when the singularities merge rather than the event horizons?

Edit; <3 LIGO, it's very inspiring :)

Answer :Hi /u/hazyPixels,

Great question. In these particular simulations, the spheres approximate the event horizons of the black holes, but they are not quite the same thing. They are something known as "apparent horizons," which it turns out can be identified easily in the simulations of black holes. The apparent horizons are always inside of the event horizon, and the singularities are always inside of apparent horizons.

Event horizons are a lot harder to identify, it turns out. That's because of what an event horizon is: it's the surface where if you're inside it, there's no getting out, ever. To identify this surface requires running the simulations all the way to the end and then figuring out a clever way to go back and find where this surface of no return was. 

It's important to understand with these kinds of simulations that we aren't just putting down some spheres and tracking their motion. The simulations compute how spacetime itself is curved in the whole region around and a little bit inside the black holes, and how it changes as the black holes orbit. We don't necessarily need to know where the surfaces of the black holes are at a given moment to correctly predict how spacetime is churning and producing gravitational waves.

Finally, we don't really learn about what the singularities do when we simulate the mergers of black holes. They are, after all, points where you'd get infinite numbers and computer codes would crash. There are various ways of avoiding having to simulate the singularities while still correctly evolving the black holes, and this was a challenge that took decades to solve properly.

Question :Would it be possible to add a third arm to LIGO? A vertical arm dug into the ground. That way, you wouldn't need to operate two detectors to know where the gravitational waves come from.

Answer :Great idea. It would involve a funky arrangement of our mirrors to make such a three arm detector work (or three separate two-arm detectors), but in principle it could. In practice, it wouldn't work well.

Funnily enough, putting aside the obvious cost implications of digging a 4km tunnel into the Earth, the main problem as far as I can tell would be gravity. Not gravitational waves, but the gravitational pull of the Earth. If we were to dig a tunnel into the ground, we'd have to sit a mirror at the base of the tunnel to reflect the light back towards the surface. An important aspect of running a gravitational wave detector is the control of the lengths of the arms - the control system must ensure the arms are held at a precise length in order for the light in the arms to interfere destructively at the input. We feed back corrections to the mirrors by applying signals to magnetic actuators on and near to the mirrors. When our optics are sitting on the Earth's surface, the amount of force we can apply to the mirrors is strong: because the force is applied at a right angle to the Earth's gravitational pull, so we don't have to fight against it. However, at the bottom of a tunnel, we'd need to apply a force that not only corrects the mirror's position to keep the length of the arm fixed, but we'd have to fight against gravity too. Gravity is pretty strong, and we'd have to use a lot stronger actuators. This introduces more problems, as when we use actuators, we necessarily introduce some noise.

Another issue with this approach is that each arm would behave differently in the presence of seismic noise. If some earthquake passed by the detector shaking the ground up and down, the mirror at the end of the arm on the surface would also shake up and down. This would not show up in the detector because, from the light's point of view, the position of the surface of the mirror would not change (caveat: this assumes the mirror's surface is exactly 90 degrees to the horizon; it almost is, but not quite, so in reality some vertical motion does couple into the horizontal direction). The other mirror - at the bottom of the tunnel - however, will shake up and down and this motion will directly change the length of the arm, and create an unwanted signal at the output. The benefit to putting both arms on the Earth's surface is that the mirrors both shake in the same way, and so the effect of the shaking cancels out - only the relative motion between the mirrors matters when it comes to detecting gravitational waves.

Now, that's not to say that we haven't thought a bit about this. There are two proposed gravitational observatories that have three arms: the Einstein Telescope (a European project that may be built in the next 20 years) and LISA (a European and, recently, NASA project to create a detector in space). Instead of placing the three arms at right angles to each other, they are arranged as an equilateral triangle in one plane (such as the Earth's surface in the case of the Einstein Telescope). This means that the observatory is sensitive to gravitational waves from all directions, and it allows us to look at the different signal strengths appearing at each corner of the triangle to work out from where in the sky the gravitational wave came from.

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :Thank you for your work!
My questions:
What is the current detection limit of the project? Which events do you expect to detect in the near future? 
What do you think about and expect from the LISA pathfinder project?
Do you consider it a future rival or do you have a collaboration?

Answer :There are a few current limits.

Firstly, the detectors are limited in their sensitivity by various noise sources which we are working to reduce. Some of these noise sources are fundamental to the detectors designs and will require upgraded or new facilities to reduce. Others can be reduced by carefully adjusting the interferometers as we learn more and more about their characteristics.

Secondly, we currently only have three detectors operational around the world. There are the two LIGO detectors in the USA, and the GEO600 detector in Germany. GEO600 has been operational since the early 2000s and has pioneered many of the most important technologies that make the LIGO detectors as good as they are. However, GEO600 is limited due to the size of its facility and the particular interferometer configuration it uses. That means that it is difficult to tell from where in the sky a particular gravitational wave came from - because such a measurement relies on having extremely sensitive detectors spaced out around the world. Right now the two most sensitive detectors are in North America, and, although separated by thousands of kilometers, they are still "close" in terms of the entire planet. There are detectors under construction in Italy and Japan which, when they join the worldwide network, will provide us with much better ability to localise sources in the sky. Their sensitivity will also compliment that of LIGO, and allow us to see slightly weaker gravitational waves that we would otherwise not have seen with just the two LIGOs and GEO600.

In the near future we hope to see gravitational waves from new sources. One such predicted source is compact neutron star binaries - these are exciting not only because they would represent another emitter of gravitational waves other than black holes, but also that we might see light emitted from them at the same time! That would give us an idea of both what was happening inside the neutron stars (from the gravitational waves), and also outside (from the emitted light).

The LISA Pathfinder project was a marvellous success and full credit must go to the amazing scientists that worked on it. Some of the scientists that work on LISA Pathfinder also work, or worked at one point, on LIGO and other ground-based detectors. We're all friends, and we regularly share ideas at conferences. In reality, we're not competing with each other, but helping each other. LISA Pathfinder was trying out a completely different approach to detect gravitational waves - from space, and with a different kind of interferometer - but some technologies overlapped and allowed us to share our improvements. They are also searching for very low frequency gravitational waves that we are simply not capable of detecting with our ground based detectors (seismic noise is so strong at low frequencies that it masks low frequency gravitational waves).

I'm extremely excited about the LISA project, which is what LISA Pathfinder was a step towards. In the future, we will have LISA in space looking at low frequency gravitational waves, and our ground-based network looking at higher frequencies. We can potentially track sources from low to high, and learn even more about their origin. I can't wait!

-SL, postdoc in gravitational wave interferometry, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow, UK

Question :What do think happens when a person enters a black hole?


Question :When I was doing similar research in this area (8 years ago), I was told that phenomena like supernova's ect would be very rare and so getting more data would take a long time at that time discovering a gravitational seemed far out of reach. How rare are these events really? It seems that they are probably more frequent then I am estimating.

Question :As a new LIGO facility is coming up in India (INDIGO), what kind of people (scientists, engineers, etc) will be required and how can someone apply to work in the said facility? 

Question :Can you describe the scientific organization and production process? I work in medical informatics and clinical intervention science, and small teams are the norm.

Question :Hi and thanks foro the AMA. First off, this might come a bit off-topic, but have to ask since I am mildly related to your work!

What kind of hardware do you use for your computations? As I understand it, you create tons of data (Terabytes of data) that must be processed with, I believe, some urgency. To my knowledge you use big grids of computers working in parallel and synchronized through "workflow" tasks. Is this true or is something in this description wrong?

I have studied Computer Science and my pre PhD work includes some of your so called workflows. My PhD focuses on optimizing grids of computers to reduce the overall time needed to do these calculations on the grid, thus another question goes here: how would you rate the importance of improving your computing grid performance in your project?

Answer :Thanks for the question /u/MadCake92! You're right, we do produce and analyse a lot of data (aside from the main measurement we make to detect gravitational waves, we monitor thousands of other instruments to look for atmospheric and seismic disturbances which can cause changes in the length of the interferometer arms, and thus look a bit like gravitational waves, and can use those measurements early-on to rule out "triggers" [event candidates], in total we record around 100,000 streams of data at up to 16kHz) and it's on the order of terabytes every month. Storage isn't ordinarily a big problem, but we do need to store most of the data on archival tape systems once it's been analysed. 

An overview of a typical data workflow goes something like this:


The data is recorded by a cluster of machines at each observatory, and stored on hard disk
The data is distributed to a number of analysis clusters around the world
"Low-latency" analysis is run on incoming data to identify events as quickly as possible (ideally < 1 minute, but often a bit longer than that). These analyses trade precision for speed to some extent, so
"High-latency" analysis is then run on the data which we think contains events, which can take several hours to run
Long analyses are run over entire observing runs of data (one of these is the Einstein@Home project) which can take years to produce results


We run multiple low-latency and high-latency analyses simultaneously, and they're run on clusters with several thousand to several tens of thousands of CPU cores and often a large number of GPUs.

In addition to data analysis, we need to run large numbers of simulations, and these can take weeks to produce on dedicated clusters.

DW / Science Fellow, LIGO Livingston Observatory & PhD Student, University of Glasgow

Question :I know that we have ducted gravity waves that run through our own atmosphere. Is their any evidence that these interstellar gravity waves interact with our atmosphere and produce more ducted ones in the troposphere. 

Answer :Hi /u/Hollyingrd6,

Despite the names, there is no relation between the various kinds of "gravity waves" you might hear about and the "gravitational waves" LIGO has detected. "Gravity waves" are pretty familiar to us all: they are the ripples that travel across the surface of a pond, for example. Another example are the atmospheric waves you mentioned, and in general a "gravity wave" is a wave in a fluid where buoyancy is playing a key role in the evolution of the wave.

The similarity of the names has caused confusion for tons of students. The gravitational waves emitted by black holes don't produce gravity waves of any kind here on Earth: they are far too weak to move fluids around in a detectable way. This is why we require really complex and sensitive detectors like LIGO to find gravitational waves.

Question :1: When do we get to hear the new blip?

2: Related.  It would be pretty interesting to hear either very long recordings from the detectors, or perhaps the realtime wave.

Question :Hello. I once read about how the sensitivity relies on pendulum swings. I think i saw 2 in the breakdown of the lenses, but why not use 3-4-5 pendulums?  

Answer :The pendulums are used to isolate the mirrors from various sources of vibration, and your intuition is absolutely correct! LIGO uses a set of 4 pendulums to isolate the mirrors, but I admit that if you look at the diagrams you can find online it can be tricky to see all four of them. 

Take a look at this page from the Caltech LIGO website (https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/page/vibration-isolation). You can see in the section of "Optics Suspensions" a labeled diagram of the suspension system. There is the big "test mass" at the bottom (which hosts the mirror used to reflect the laser we use to measure changes in the mirror's position), and above that is the "penultimate mass" which is the other obviously identifiable pendulum. But above that is a complicated arrangement of metal blocks that hide two more pendulum stages, for four in total. They're easy to miss, particularly if a diagram isn't fully labeled!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Theoretically, once the LIGO's sensitivity is improved and capable of observing pulsars and supernovae more accurately, would it become too noisy as to not be able to detect any additional events that occur in the same direction, but further away, than a currently observed pulsars "hum"?

The universe is so large it would seem that with enough sensitivity, it would be very noisy.

Question :Why are gravitational waves so improtant to be able to measure? What significance is it other than a new perspective? Also will there be any technology advancements due to these findings do you think? 

Question :LIGO seems to be averaging a confirmed detection once every month or two while operating. Since this signal was several months ago, how many candidate signals are you currently reviewing that are likely to be more black hole mergers?

Question :Do you have a suggested mechanism for how the merging black holes convert the huge amount of mass (3 solar masses for example) into energy when they merge?  

Question :How are gravitational waves relevant for real-world applications? What new technologies/techniques could evolve from this discovery?

Answer :I love this question! One of the most straight-forward uses for doing gravitational wave astronomy is that we pretty much get to turn the universe into our own laboratory. There are so many things that we just can't replicate on earth right now (such as the super dense core of a neutron star). When you have intense conditions like this, there are some incredibly interesting thermodynamic and nuclear physics effects that take place. Gravitational waves give us the opportunity to those kinds of extreme experiments! 

Additionally, one can also test Einstein's theory of general relativity. Gravity is incredibly weak (the weakest of the four fundamental forces), so it's difficult to test it. Since gravity is so comparably weak, it requires quite a lot of mass in order to do an informative experiment. Studying gravitational waves (produced by super dense objects moving at high velocities) allow us to test general relativity in new and exciting ways that have never been done before! But I'm sure you're thinking "well how is that information actually applicable to my life?" Practically speaking, general relativity is used in your life everyday! One classic example is that a consequence of general relativity and special relativity is that time behaves differently depending on how warped space-time is (more warping = slower time). So it turns out, that the further away from the Earth you are, the less space-time is warped and vice versa. That has huge real-world consequences if you are trying to use GPS satellites to communicate driving directions to your smartphone app and the two times aren't precisely in sync (see Allstate GPS commercial).

All in all, it's hard to say that one could start a new commercial venture based solely on LIGO, but I think that's okay. The real beauty lies in the fact that we are simply gaining knowledge for knowledge's sake. One never truly knows what will come of these kinds of experiments, but failing to do them guarantees you'll never find out what great unforeseen possibilities will come about as a result of those efforts! 

-HG, Fulbright Scholar, Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics

Question :All of the measurements so far have been of positively catastrophic events, from millions of light years away.  I understand this is because the effect is very small so very large interacting masses are required.

Also mentioned has been the possibility of detecting pulsars, since they are another example of objects with very high angular momentum. 

Could similar measurements be taken of our sun as it rotates, since it's a billion times closer to us than the black holes?

Question :Based on what I have read so far, these gravitational waves are super tiny. Is this purely due to our distance from the source. If we were only one or two light years away from the merger, how big would those waves be? Would we feel spacetime itself stretching around us?

Question :Could the discovery or the confirmation of gravitational waves help in other scientific field ? How can it benefits regulars people ? Will this discovery be used to make some innovations breakthrough for day to day usage ?   

Question :I think I'm late to the party here but I've got a question for you. Have you guys found any interaction between gravity and high voltage high frequency electricity? There's a theory going around which I'm sure you know called electro-gravitics. Pretty much just a big conspiracy from what I'm getting but surely there has to be a correlation since magnetics can manipulate gravity a tiny bit. I have no idea but it's interesting to think about.

Question :Hi, amazing work. 

What is the next big step for LIGO? 

Question :Hello, I just wanted to ask if there is any connection between the detection of gravitational waves and a possible detection of gravitons. How are gravitons related to these waves? If they are not, then what are gravitons actually supposed to do? 

Question :How do you analyze the data supplied by the detectors in order to get information about the large bodies that emitted the gravitational waves?

Question :How does the measurement/detection of gravitational waves affect our understanding of dark matter, if at all? 

Question :What is the next big thing in the gravitational wave field?

Question :I live near LIGO nw, and I have a shirt with the logo and the waves on it! I'm friends with one of the people working on it there😁😁😁. I don't have a question just wanted to say you guys are awesome!!!

Question :What might you guys at LIGO and elsewhere expect to find once you turn on more of these interferometers across the globe? Increased resolution and location accuracy for certain, but what else?

Question :How are you so sure that what you detect isn't simply movements throughout the earth's geology?

Answer :The LIGO detector are the most sensitive length measuring devices in the world, and as such are sensitive to a variety of environmental signals. This includes earthquakes, shaking of the ground due to ocean waves crashing onto the shoreline (microseismic waves), trains, trees being felled in Louisiana, and wind blowing across the desert in Hanford. In addition to the main interferometers, the detectors have a variety of environmental sensors including seismometers which measure excess seismic motion. In the event of excess motion, we would trigger a data quality flag to highlight a period of increased seismic activity. Furthermore the two detectors working together are a fantastic way to differentiate true astrophysical signals. Both detectors should measure consistent signal separated by a maximum window of 10ms (the maximum light travel time between Hanford/Livingston).

Question :What is the most interesting/exciting thing you (any one or all 16 of you, that is) want to try to answer with this new way of observing the universe?

Question :Does jensens nose cause gravitational waves?

Question :Once the two black holes "touch", how long does it take for them to be merged?   
   
I'm trying to understand ... is this a sub second process? A micro second process? Or minutes/hours/days?

Question :Are the black holes waving hello or goodbye? They're obliterating themselves, but also sending a signal of their existence across the cosmos. 

Question :if you were 1 light year away would you "feel" the wave in your body?

Question :Did 2 solar masses worth of mass/energy escape from a black hole in this event?  How?

Answer :As the two super massive black holes spiral in towards each other, they essentially 'stir' space-time (in the form of gravitational waves). That 'stirring' of space-time takes a lot energy to do (essentially because of how dense and fast the objects are moving), which is why two whole solar masses are radiated away during this process. To visualize just how much energy that really is; the energy released by the binary as it spiralled together reached a level greater than the combined power of ALL light radiated by ALL the stars in the entire observable universe! How cool is that?!

-HG, Fulbright Scholar, Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics

Question :can you compare three detection events to the expectations for this detector?  when it was planned, where did "three" fall into the different prior distribution of expectations?

is there an expectation that we see these three because they fit within the parameters of this physical setup, and with more sensitive equipment we would detect more?

were there many other candidate events that were ruled out as noise, or were these three so obviously different than background that there was no judgement call?  can you give us any estimates of the distribution of signal strengths that this instrument is sampling from?

does the physical layout of the two interferometer arms detect waves traveling in different directions with different sensitivity?  IE, is it possible that there are other events traveling transverse to these events that you have missed?

are there plans to create more gravitational wave detectors?

any funny stories about accidents, mistakes or false positives?

do you think we will ever create gravitational waves intentionally?


Question :What would it take for us to identify binary star systems using gravitational waves?

Question :How can gravitational waves be used as a proof of special relativity?

Question :Thanks you all!! It is so amazing to detect miracles. Hope science will let humanity protect our world and let people live in space. 

Question :Considering that we have large gaps in our understanding of gravity and large scale forces (e.g the need for "dark" matter, "dark" energy in our theories), what level of confidence can be given to the idea that these gravity waves are caused by merging black holes?

Why couldn't this be some other form of gravitational anomaly that we haven't discovered or don't understand? Why couldn't this be an alien warp drive (half joking here), or something else entirely?

Question :Popular illustrations of einstein's relativity often use the "rubber sheet" model for how stars and planets distort spacetime to create gravity. I.e. The more massive an object is, the deeper the rubber sheet is indented and the stronger the gravity of the object. is there any relationship between the distortions visualized by the rubber sheet model and the reality of gravitational waves? If a low frequency high amplitude gravity wave passed through the solar system, would you expect any transient gravity forces acting on the planets as it passed by?

Answer :Yes, that's exactly what they measured at LIGO. It is this gravitational wave or ripple in the gravitational "rubber sheet" that was observed. 

Question :What are the biggest (potential) practical use of these findings? What i mean is aside from getting to know our universe through a new window, what would your study mean for our daily lives/future?

As a non-science head i'm trying to comprehend the scope of the matter. 

Question :Does this mean that gravity could potentially have a Doppler effect given the right conditions? And if so, could we utilize the compression/decompression of the waves in some way? 

Question :What is your favourite spin out technology so far?

Which ones do you think will have the biggest wider impact ten years from now?

Question :Can you guys create some sort of GW here on earth? if so i have a follow-up question, if not... well ill ask it anyways. Could you in theory make a spacecraft that would have a fast spinning object or something on it that emitted GW while you where traveling. Would you move alot faster?


Question :Might not be working topic, if the certain mass creates a gravitational pull, what is the minimum size an object in space would need to be to keep  human planted, albeit with very low gravity

Question :What type of research do you do after finding and verifying the gravitational waves? 
Also, does LIGO do internships, and what is required to qualify for one?

Question :This may be a stupid question, but do light waves (and all electromagnetic waves, for that matter) change frequency, wavelength, or speed near black holes? Sort of like a Doppler effect, but with gravity?

Answer :Hi, /u/LegitD0nuT, they do!

It's called a gravitational red-shift. Here's how I think about it, even if it isn't a formally robust description.

Black holes are so heavy that even light can't escape the event horizon (hence Black). So it follows that light passing by a black hole also feels the gravity. This can produce this gravitational red shift, as well as gravitational lensing - changing the path of the light around the BH. 

Light is both a particle and a wave - and the energy of that particle is related to the wavelength (colour) of that wave, by E = hc/lambda. (Here, h = Planck's constant, c = speed of light, E = energy of a photon, and lambda = wavelength of the photon). If we consider a photon propagating away from a black hole (imagine that it wasn't as close as the event horizon, so it can still escape), we can think of it as having to 'buy' its way out of the potential gravitational well. As the photon expends its energy E climbing out of the well, the right hand side of the equation has to balance too. It does this by increasing its wavelength (ie going more red) as it climbs out.

If you think of a ball trying to roll up a hill (climbing up out of a gravitational well), you'd imagine it slowing down as it climbs up, until it stops, turns around and rolls back down again. This can't happen with light though, as its speed is fixed. Instead of changing speed, its wavelength (and thus its frequency) change.

I hope that this answers your question!

BP, continuous wave data analysis, Research student, University of Glasgow.

Question :Aside from merging black holes, are there any other predicted phenomena that may produce gravitational waves that your team could find?

Answer :They are looking at all evidences of gravitational waves, not targeting a specific target. Black hole collisions due to their enormous mass and small volume are great for producing these gravitational waves so they were the first ones to be detected. 

Question :You mention that this proves stellar mass black holes, but doesn't this just prove the mass of the participating bodies? 
What aspect of it proves they're black holes? 

Answer :Hi, /u/kahlzun, and thanks for the question.

In order to detect the signal, we use a technique called matched template filtering. Using numerical relativity, we simulate a large number of compact binary collisions, and solve for the waveform of the gravitational wave at infinity (ie, as measured at Earth). With this waveform, and the simulation, we can see that the two masses remained distinct until they merged - but we can also see the distance the two were separated at each step. This turns out to be pretty handy in determining that the two objects were probably black holes. 

Black holes are the densest objects for which we expect stable inspirals at this kind of mass, so they have the smallest radius. Other objects of similar mass will be larger, and so join up earlier.  We can say that the two objects remained distinct separate object until after they were closer than any two other such large, stable objects' radii. Any other, less dense object would have joined up much earlier.

I hope that this answers your question,

BP, continuous gravitational wave data analysis, research student, University of Glasgow

Question :Since gravity as we know it is a wave can we possibly in the future create an opposite wave and cancel gravity out in that way? I ask this in hopes that this would be the key to make a hoverboard Marty McFly style! Also, imagine if we could send spaceships using antigravity like this and not need rockets! 

Answer :To create negative quanta values in a gravitational field you would require something with negative mass/energy which we know as dark energy or vacuum energy. 

Question :What should we be looking for now? What other predictions does General Relativity predict and how could they be found? Is this the only experiment the LUGO can conduct? 

Question :This will be buried, but since you guys have discovered that gravity does propagate as a wave, does that mean we can interact with it like other types waves in the universe? Is there a possibility of being able to manipulate, amplify, or destroy the wave? 

Question :"2 suns worth of energy" seems like a lot.  Is this similar to other events, such as gamma ray bursts, quasars, etc ?

Question :Are there any other kinds of instruments which can help validate the events you find? Satellites or other interferometers that might be too noisy to catch an event but might collectively show some results?

Question :I have a question that may be answerable by someone else. Do these type of "stellar collisions" happen in seconds? At what point would a massive object like a black hole seemingly "blink" across space? 

Question :My main fascination with the detections that LIGO has publicized so far is the absolutely massive amount of energy involved in the events. I recall that the first event had three solar masses released during the merger of the two BHs. 

My question is, what happens to regular matter that is exposed to so much energy? For example, if the Earth were orbiting one AU from a binary black hole undergoing a merger, would we be able to perceive the event? Would it destroy the planet?

Thanks!

Question :Do you have any theories on why your results differ from earlier predictions, as in you already observed 3 black holes merging (congratulations on that btw), but haven't got any neutron stars or some other things? 

Question :Thanks for the AMA! Couple quick questions; was anything about your experiment upgraded or changed between detections? Did you change or update models or any other simulations you may have done? Thanks.

Question :Have you detected any neutron star signals? If not, how can you explain their absence as we know they are common as we can see them visually

Question :What kind of tools do you use for the data analysis? 

Handling that vast amount of data in an efficient way sounds like another hurdle to overcome.

Are there any specific machine learning algorithms you use in order to quickly find 'templates', as mentioned previously.

Congratulations on all your hard work paying off!

Question :What is the uncertainty in the measurement of the length of the beam? What measures do you guys take to try and keep this to a minimum? Does LIGO have to contend with any sort of quantum effects in its experimentation?

Question :How did you determine that the two black holes weren't spinning around the same axis ?

Question :My understanding is that you are measuring gravity waves by detecting differences in optical path length between two arms.  However, how do you measure gravity waves when the space itself is being stretched / contracted ?  It's like you have a rubbery ruler, that gets bigger as space expands, therefore the markings on the ruler expand and the length appears the same...

Question :If gravitational waves are contractions and expansions in the fabric of space-time, do they also cause minor changes in the gravitational force in the area they're passing through? Since both gravity and gravitational waves are related to the curvature of space-time? If so, could strong gravitational waves also cause a wave of time-dilation to propagate outward in addition to length contractions and expansions, causing some issues with measurements?

Also, since some models of Dark matter predict that it may only interact through gravity, could detections from LIGO and Virgo potentially be used to verify those theories?

Question :How do you feel about the financial implications of your work? I mean that in terms of the money going towards you, towards other science, or money going towards anything else. I don't mean to be provocative - I ask because in my own scientific work it is something of a neurosis. Am I taking away money which would be better served elsewhere? How could I know whether that's the case anyway? We come in to science to learn things with the goal of helping humanity - but bidding for resources which could be better used by others is actually the opposite... It's a problem which I am not sure we spend enough time as scientists thinking about, and I would really be very interested to hear your thoughts, both in general and specifically relating to LIGO. Cheers, and congrats on the latest observation

Question :Hello!
Some of my classmates bounced this question off me and we couldn't come up with a concrete answer. Could gravitational waves be gravitationally lensed? 
I'm convinced they should not be able to, as then they would affect their own propogation which doesn't seem to make sense.

Question :Would the burst of gravitational energy have the power to wipe out life if it was close enough to the explosion, yet far enough to survive the initial blast (if that makes sense)?

Question :I always wondered, dumb question I know, but can a particle "surf" a sufficiently strong gravitational wave? Is there anything in the universe that could create such strong wave?

Question :Oh my god, I'm so excited.

I didn't know you did a first one, so I'll start here:
What's the difference (as people, then as scientists) from the first, second, and third detections? I know, on some level, the first is exciting and new, the second isn't new but is still exciting, the third can be satisfying. But, considering the... uh... gravity of the discovery (I'm sorry, I can't help that pun), how have the experiences changed over time?

With each discovery, have you found data that will help refine, improve, or change the methods used for detection? Is there any room (currently) for improvement, even if you can't currently implement them?

What implications for the future of your research does a third detection have that the first or second didn't?

I also want to say I loved the first detection, and listened to the sped up audio about a hundred times. It was thrilling to hear and watch, and I'm so excited by this, and you guys are amazing for doing this.

Question :Are there any advancement in knowing what is in a black hole now or what happens to the mass that enters it?

Question :This is a two parter:
1.) I watched a video on the BBC, the person summarizing the most recent confirmed detection said that these, "GW detections will help us understand how gravity really works." Is this correct?

2.) Can gravitational waves really open doors to new methods of communication? (An idea discussed on a science podcast.) Wouldn't that take impractical amounts of energy?

Question :Will you ever be able to use these instruments to detect an area that is absent of gravity?  An area that a gravitational wave would bend around for whatever reason?  

Question :Can LIGO detect earthquakes?  Detection would be at the "speed of gravity" if your machine could detect sudden changes in earth gravity distribution.

Question :So that happened 3 billion years ago right?

Question :This may be a dumb or uninformed question, but is the propogation of gravitational waves influenced by distortions of spacetime caused by black holes and the like? I know that the path of light is affected by black holes and planets, but is the path of gravitational waves influenced in the same manner? 

And on a somewhat related note, when the path of light is distorted by a curvature in spacetime, does the light take longer to arrive at its destination? Say for example that light leaves a star, and passes a black hole while traveling towards us, causing its path to bend. If the black hole hadn't been there in the first place, would the light have arrived sooner?

Thanks!

Question :Does knowing about gravitational waves aid in space exploration? Could it be able to make a kind of surf board (metaphorically speaking) to ride the waves, or possibly to predict turbulent zones and other space phenomena?

Question :Could GW ever be used to carry data in a fashion similar to EM? It seems that it would help reduce signal attenuation and make point-to-point communication on Earth work for a global-mesh without a middle-man.

Question :I cant help but compare this scientific discovery to the first time we discovered electromagnetic waves. In that era, the next technological steps were to create transmitters. Is it feasible that we will ever be able to create a gravitational wave transmitter? Besides transmitter and receivers, is there ongoing work in harnessing gravitational waves for practical purposes?

Question :If a gravitational wave background exists as some hypothesize, how far from detecting it would your present equipment be?

Question :What shape is the universe?

Question :Will gravitational waves allow us to see beyond the light that has come to us? Will we be able to find the end of the universe?

Question :What would you expect to detect if Sagittarius A ate a star like our sun?



Question :So black holes are a proven fact?

Last I read they were still a theory (Total layman here)

Question :I don't know how common this is in astronomy, but your 3rd detection is the reason I saw "cubic Gigaparsec" [used seriously](https://www.reddit.com/r/Astronomy/comments/6enzrn/ligo_spots_a_third_black_hole_merger_tightens/dicp4o5/?context=4) in a back-of-the-napkin calculation/conversation.

Just wanted you all to know that :)

Question :Well I may be kind of late for this but here I go. First, thanks for doing this AMA. You are doing an awesome job.

Since there are all kinds of science questions, I would like to go to the people side of this topic.
- What kind of background did you have prior to working on LIGO? 
- Was working here the expected course for your career or was it a surprise when you had the chance?

Again, thanks for doing this. You are awesome! 

EDIT: extra question. As an IT guy myself, what kind of language/technology/skills should one master to be useful on a team like that one?

Question :I am very interested to see how this is going to effect science in the next few years, and I'm sure this is coming in late. But what are sone of the new questions we are learning to ask from this huge leap? Are there any fascinating thought experiments concerning gravitational waves?

Question :How does it feel to be less interesting than LEGO?

Question :If you had the funds quivalent to the cost of building your current detector, would you build a new one or upgrade the current? 

Question :Over what period of time were the two stellar masses converted to gravitational waves? I.e., what was the power of the event? 

Question :What's the future of gravitational wave observatories? Is there going to be a Moore's Law where these detectors decrease in size and cost?

Question :Is there experimental evidence that the waving of space goes at the speed of c in space?

Question :Ask anythi g you swy......

Which player scored a hatrick in a world final? Clue: he was playing for tbe host country.

Question :do you ever use legos in your research?

Question :Any plans to expand your detecting ability by building new arrays?

Question :Can you provide an audio simulation of the waves?

Question :First off thank you for doing this AMA. This is something I am interested in myself ever since I am studying Physics in college as well as when I heard news of the first detection and when I attended a seminar featuring Dr. Chad Hanna who has also worked with LIGO.

From what I understand the waves that have been detected have only been from binary black hole systems. So what I am interested in is how much more difficult is it to detect waves from a binary neutrons star system, a black hole-neutron star binary system?

Question :Should there be a visible indication for the events you are detecting. It seems to me that anything violent enough to cause waves detectable by our amazing, wonderful but feeble instruments ought to also cause a similar effect on the electromagnetic spectrum.

Question :Will we ever be able to use gravitational wave to communicate instantly across the galaxy? 

Question :I heard from the Veritassium video that there is an inference about the universe having a slight composition of black holes made from dark matter. Is this true? And if so, how, and how could one prove it?

Question :Thank you very much for this AMA!

* What is the reason that LVT151012 is only a candidate? Was it too weak compared to the noise?
* How are the constraints on the graviton mass derived? Are you looking for dispersion of the signal between Hanford and Livingston?
* Did other gravitational wave interferometers (Geo, Virgo) pick up signals that were also detected by LIGO, making it possible to find the source?
* Is the frequency of events (and their respective associated masses) consistent with current stellar evolution models or is it so far undecidable due to the low amount of verified events?

*Edit*: I feel like I should know this, but I have to ask:

* When measuring a gravitational wave, can you decompose the data into cross and plus polarized signals?
* Are there any constraints on alternative gravitational theories from those events so far?

Question :How do you build a strucutre here at Earth accurate enough to measure ATTOmeters? To me it sounds as it breached into the unceraninties proer of th world of quatum mechanics, yet they are created by huge macroscopic events, how does this work? How could one create such a precise intrument? Thanks in advance and thanks for your amazing work.

Question :What would happen if we were closer to the origin? Since the waves are getting smaller as they expand, what would we experiment at 1/1000th the distance? Is there any proximity where a human could notice a wave?  Could it hurt or would one just become "longer" for a bit?

Question :You guys definitely know how to calculate 3D integrals inwardly but could you guys calculate the date when the third detector will be ready? We need to triangulate and observe this black holes events!

Question :The three mergers observed so far have all happened with black holes in the range of 10-50 solar masses.  There isn't enough data to be confident that most mergers are between black holes of this mass but it does suggest it.  If that were the case what would be the cause?  Are most black holes in the universe of this mass or are there some specific scenarios that cause the mergers to happen with black holes in this range?

Question :in the recent veritasium video about this new detection, on youtube, david reitze said that the event happened 3 billion years ago and at a distance of 3 billion years. 

  Now, spacetime is expanding and the rate of this expansion is accelerating, right? 

  so isn't the event supposed to be froma  distance closer than 3 billion light years, or alternatevely the event itself happened more recently than 3 billion years ago?

  or have i completely misunderstood something here?

Question :Thanks for the AMA! 

As far as I know, the sources of the hitherto 3 detections are mergers of black holes that are quite massive. Do such events frequently occur in our observable universe? If yes, does that mean we don't need to wait long for the 4th or 5th detection?

My second question is a hypothetical one, and may sound even more stupid: 

Suppose we could survive the huge amount of energy equivalent to some solar masses emitted during the merging process; and we were quite close to the source, say, 1 AU, practically, would there be any difference in the properties (e.g. wavelength, etc) of the gravitational wave detected? Could we somehow "feel" the ripples in spacetime? 

(Edit: a little question added.)

Question :2 suns worth of energy is quite a bit, if you where sufficiently close would all that gravity waves disrupt your existence? If yes how? My question is, if you are enough from the black holes to not get spagettified, what would happen to you?

Question :What is the point of spending big dollars on detecting GWs? Is there anything specific they might help us achieve in the future?

Answer :1) They further validate Einstein's General Relativity, which is widely supported but not exactly "proven" (as with anything in science).

2) Gravity and gravitational waves can pass through matter unobstructed. A "gravitational wave telescope" could see right through physical objects that are blocking our view, and would not require any sort of external presence like visible light.

Question :I heard it was surprising you got a signal so shortly after turning it on.  

Is it correct to extend the wave description in thinking you should be getting continuous signals of the same source if they're to be thought of as ripples of a pond?

How are new signals decided to be coming from completely different sources?

Do gravitational waves have constructive/destructive interference like we'd think of in classical waves?

Answer :Hi /u/msiekkinen, and thanks for the question.

It was a bit surprising that as soon the machine was turned on, we heard a great big loud signal. The chances of that were pretty slim - a few days later and we'd have missed it!

My specific area of research is indeed in continuous gravitational waves - emissions from a single source that are continuous. The typical source that we think of for this is of a neutron star. These are pretty common in our galaxy, which means even if they are weak emissions, we might have some chance of detecting them.

Neutron stars are these weird things, the leftovers of dead stars. They're cold, so they don't shine like stars. They're small, only a few miles across, but weigh a little more than our sun. They're crazy dense because they're practically a giant atomic nucleus - the internals of the star are superfluidic densely packed atomic matter. The star has a crust, mostly made out of iron and other stable heavier elements. These things don't shine, but they have these crazy strong magnetic fields, so like Earth, they have northern and southern lights. The light from these poles is projected out like a lighthouse, and as the neutron star (NS) rotates, it might sweep over Earth, letting us know it's there. 

But gravitational waves are only emitted by objects that have an accelerating mass. Circular acceleration still counts. So we could have a pulsar whose centre of mass is slightly away from the axis of rotation, like a wobbly spinning top, which could radiate gravitational waves at a fixed frequency, for a very, very long time.



How do we know new waves are from different sources?

Well, although gravitational wave detectors are like a listening ear, open to everything that comes their way, with two ears you can start to build up an idea of where something came from. And if 2 signals aren't from the same place, they can't be the same. 


“Space is big. You just won't believe how vastly, hugely, mind-bogglingly big it is. I mean, you may think it's a long way down the road to the chemist's, but that's just peanuts to space.” ― Douglas Adams, The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy


The chances of 2 events being from the same objects is pretty low.



And for your third question: Normal waves you might think of are caused by dipoles - so they interfere constructively and destructively exactly as you think. Gravitational waves are created by quadruples - so they behave a little differently. They do have constructive and destructive interference, but it isn't as intuitive as you might think.

I hope that's gone some way to answering your questions,
BP, continuous wave data analysis, research student, University of Glasgow

Question :What is the most far out concept that uses gravitational waves to better our future?

Question :How do you distinguish between local disturbances and gravitational waves?

Answer :Hi /u/3DIndian,

We have a couple of ways to tell local disturbances and gravitational wave events,

First, we have two sites, and more on the way (VIRGO, KAGRA, LIGO India), and we require that a signal be present in more than one detector at the same time. This means that if a local disturbance occurs at one site, the chances that a similar looking local disturbance happens at another site within light-travel time is relatively low. 

But wait, theres more!

At each site, the entire place is decked out in thousands of physical environment monitors (PEMs). These could be anything from rain sensors outside, to microphones in the cleanrooms, to seismometers all over the site. Literally thousands of them, covering as many bases as we could think of. When a candidate signal comes in at both sites, not only does it have to look similar to the signal at the other sites, but it has to look dissimilar to any signal in any of the PEMs. 

This makes a pretty stringent test to weed out all of the local disturbances. 

I hope that answers your question!

BP, continuous wave data analysis and LIGO Fellow, Research student, University of Glasgow

Question :How can you tell where a gravitational wave was produced?

Answer :This is a tricky question, but also very important for electromagnetic counterpart follow-up analyses! If there's a signal, you want to tell the astronomers where exactly to point their telescopes before the afterglow of the signal goes away.   

First off, if we have just one detector, it's very difficult to localize the source. One simple way to localize, using just two detectors, is to compare the time of arrival of the gravitational wave signal between both detectors. If we see that the signal arrives at, say the detector in Washington State, first, then it can be said that the signal came from somewhere within a ring-shaped pattern of sky in the northern hemisphere. Having three detectors can reduce that ring to two smaller spots; four detectors further reduces the search area to a single spot in the sky.

There are of course more sophisticated methods that can also be applied. For example, you can measure the phase difference between the same gravitational wave signal at different sites. That means that you compare how much the the gravitational wave signals are shifted with respect to each other. The mass parameters of the source also provides useful information about the sky location. Ideally, what should be done is to take into account ALL of this information into what we call a 'coherent' analysis. But you have to be clever about you distribute the computational cost of doing such an analysis. 

Unfortunately, binary black hole sources don't have a strong electromagnetic counterpart, but of course it's always possible we might find something we weren't expecting. Once we start detecting gravitational wave signals from binary neutron star and neutron star black hole mergers (hopefully, very soon :), sky localization will be even more important for these follow-up analyses! 

-HG, Fulbright Scholar, Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics

Question :Caltech's Rana Adhikari [recently said](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NVKO7UCIlgs&t=68s), "This one lasted longer than the first one, both because our detectors are better at the lowest frequencies, and the signals are from black holes that are smaller, so they last longer."

How have you improved your detectors over the last 18 months? And what will it take to improve sensors such that we're able to observe gravitational waves daily?

Thanks!

Answer :Between the first observing run when we saw the first detection of gravitational waves, and the current observing run, several improvements were made to the two detectors. At LIGO Livingston the amount of scattered light inside the interferometer was reduced, while at Hanford the input laser power was increased.

In fact increasing the laser power is the main way in which the sensitivity of the detectors can be improved. The laser light is used to probe the position of the test masses. It is the position of these test masses that is changed very slightly by a gravitational wave. By increasing the amount of power in the probe beam you increase the size of the signal induced by gravitational waves relative to the sensing noise, called 'shot noise.' The signal-to-noise ratio increases with increased laser power. 

To increase the laser power a laser amplifier was installed at LIGO Hanford to increase the input laser power from 22W to 30W. After the end of the current observing run the plan is to increase the laser power at both sites to 70W. The final upgrade to aLIGO will have a input laser power of more than 200W.

[LIGO Science Fellow/Research Student]

Question :[deleted]

Answer :Thanks for the question.

The LISA Pathfinder mission was incredibly successful, and a great achievement. It far exceeded the performance needed to demonstrate that a space based gravitational was technologically possible. It was able to release its test-masses and to observe them to be in free fall unperturbed by external forces. In fact, it achieved a precision close to the requirement of a full gravitational wave detector and far greater than required of the technology demonstrator.

The prospect of a LISA mission is very exciting as it would open up a different spectrum of gravitational wave observation, being sensitive to signals at much lower frequencies than ground based detectors. LISA would be able to detect gravitational waves emitted by supermassive black hole binaries, as well as stellar mass stars colliding with black holes. A space based detector would also be able to see the earlier stages (at lower frequencies) of the inspiraling of compact binary object (such as GW170104) that could be observed colliding at a later time by the ground based LIGO detectors.

[PhD Student University of Glasgow]

Question :Can you talk about your day to day work in LIGO?  How does it change when you "discover" another gravitational wave event? How many people generally work on analyzing the results? What do you have to do to analyze the results? And how long does the process take?

Thanks for doing the AMA!

Answer :During observing runs day-to-day life at the sites involves keeping the detector online to collect data and fixing it when it goes down. Advanced LIGO is currently in its second observing run, The same run as when we detected this third event GW170104.

There are 'operators' on site 24/7 who keep an eye on the detector while it is running and try to bring it back up if it goes down.  

There are also scientists and engineers who diagnose probelems with the detector and work to improve the sensitivity and up-time. There are also people who work on maintaining the vacuum system and the general site facilities.

The analysis of the data collected is mostly done off-site by computational analysis 'pipelines' run by a large number, roughly 250, scientits in the global LIGO scientific collaboration. When a possible gravitational wave event is identified the data is scrutinised heavily before the result is published.

To get an idea of day-to-day life on site check out the LIGO tweeters page which lists people working at LIGO who tweet about this stuff twitter.com/LIGO/lists/lvc-tweeters

Question :Can it be used as propulsion?

Question :This is some very exciting science, thanks for the AMA!
My question is how much more precise would a space based detector array be?

Question :Is the existence of black holes by now considered irrefutable, or are there still somewhat respected and viable contrary opinions?

Thank you



Answer :Afaik, the basic idea is considered mostly irrefutable, but there are still some other potential theories relating to behavior at and in the event horizon. For instance, with the project to take an image of the event horizon of Sagittarius A at the center of our galaxy, we should be able to determine if the behavior of light is as expected (namely one side being brighter than the other side due to the direction in which the light is moving). This would help further rule out some theories.

Question :In an interview with veritasium, someone had said that these occurrences we're very rare. How does it feel to detect the 3rd in such a short amount of time? How possible is it that the majority of these have been missed?

Answer :We just haven't been listening for these events for very long. The rarity is an expectation based on our models of the number of black holes in the universe.

Question :Why does it take 6 months to announce an event detection?

Answer :I'm not exactly qualified to answer this, but it's mostly in order to verify the results and be absolutely sure that the event is indeed a valid one and to make sure that all measurements are correct. Announcing events before enough verification has been performed can end up causing harm, either by harming public perception of the capabilities of the scientists, or by misleading other research that relies on the results.

Question :The explanation I have in my head is that a changing gravitational field creates gravitational waves. For example, a giant mass were to just appear in the middle of nowhere, the gravitational field around that new object would change moving outward at the speed of light. Is that why we can only detect events such as these black hole mergers, since the gravitational field is changing so rapidly that the waves given off are detectable? Does that mean that any motion generates some extremely small amount of gravitational waves, because any motion slightly changes the g-field?

Question :Is your current equipment sensitive enough to detect other less energetic events like neutron star mergers?

Question :So we know that binary neutron stars exist, we can see them with radio astronomy. We now have confirmed that gravitational waves exist due to the absolutely bonkers tech behind laser interferometry. Is there a reason why we haven't seen gravitational waves from binary neutron stars? Does something happen in their "life cycle" that causes them to not radiate? Is it just a matter of not really looking for that yet?

Question :Hi,

Is it possible that a gravitational wave could affect dark matter somehow - enough to detect or to draw statistical conclusions given enough data/observed events?

Sincerely

Question :How long do you guys wait near the detector to witness a gravitational wave?

Question :**General Q:** Which are the tests, as well as matching the data with the others interferometers, to establish that a detection is really a gravitational wave?

**Q About this discovery**: The paper talks about how the two black holes may not have their spin axis aligned, how this is deduceble from the data?


Thanks very much to all of you for the AMA!


Question :Is it possible you've detected more gravitational waves than you're telling us about? 

Answer :We're constantly analyzing our data looking for events, and it takes time for us to develop certainty that a given event is astronomical in origin. We're still in the early stages of gravitational wave astronomy as an observational field, so we tend to be careful and deliberate with our announcements.

But we definitely don't hide anything, nor do we keep events secret for longer than it takes us to confirm that they were caused by gravitational waves. Hopefully, as these detections become more routine, the time it takes for us to go from detection, to confirmation, to announcement will get shorter and shorter, until some day there will be no delay at all!

As for now, we're still analyzing results from our second observing run. You can be sure you'll hear from us the moment we have more to share!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Did you have any issues with your Hanford detector after the recent shutdown?

Question :I have a serious question that has been on my mind about the mechanics of gravitational waves.

Lets say if there is a space ship traveling towards or threw the gravitational waves in a straight line, would the spaceship see periods of space/time compression and expansion? and what would alternating compressions of space/time feel like?

Would the spaceship ride the waves?  
Would time slow down as the spaceship reaches the crest and then speed up as it dived into the trough?

Perhaps if the spaceship orbited the mass on the crest of a wave or in the trough of a wave, would the spaceship travel more distance in less time?

Thank you for your pioneering work, truly grateful.

Question :Hello. It's great what are you doing, thanks for the AMA?

What's your opinion on this? Is it actually useful?

https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/zooniverse/gravity-spy

Answer :Hi /u/andermetalsh, gravityspy is pretty important, it really does a lot to help us on our searches!

Our detector is very sensitive, and reacts to an awful lot. When the mirrors move relative to each other, we get some signal in the strain channel. Our code then runs over that code with what's called a matches template search, looking for compact binary coalescences - 2 black holes, 2 neutron stars, or one BH and one NS, falling in and spiralling around each other. Each mass pairing gives a unique signal, and so a unique template. When the data and the template have a low mismatch, then it looks like a signal. However, as you know, not all signal are true signals. These false positive chirps are caused by any number of disturbance to the interferometer. Noise sources might be a truck going down a nearby bumpy road, a refrigerator running where it should be quiet, or 100 LEDs flashing in unison. but none of these look like chirps.

The chirpiest noise that I can think of is something we call a "blip glitch" - they're pretty short, and like a chirp, they have a rising edge, so could have low mismatch. These blips have a wide variety of morphologies, so can look like any number of events. To boot, they're relatively common - we see a few of these in each detector each week. Because all of these glitches look very slightly different, there is no straight forward way to tell the computers how to sort a glitchy sort of thing from a chirpy sort of thing. Turns out that humans are pretty good at this sort of thing, so we have Gravity Spy. 

Unfortunately, we don't know what causes these blips. It's an infamous problem in the detector characteristics team. And we don't even know if the slightly different looking glitchy things are caused by the same noise source. We really are a little stumped on that one. By sorting out glitches, and evvewn subdividing glitches into different morphologies, we hope that we can reduce these to a simple core set of characteristic, which could lead us to their root cause. 

And with all of these human-classified sets of triggers, we are trying to train a computer. Techniques that use machine learning often need large training sets, that teach the machine how to distinguish one thing from another. The more similar the two things, the harder it is for the machine to classify, so a larger training set is needed.

So Gravity Spy is, it turns out, important for LIGO, not only to help us understand our detector, but to also get fewer false alarms, and to get people out there like you engaged with what LIGO data looks like!

I hope that's answered your question,

BP, Continuous waves data analysis, Research student at University of Glasgow

Question :Do gravitational waves have anything to do with theory regarding the gravaton?  And if so is the discovery of GW a step towards figuring out a theory regarding it?

Question :First of all, Welcome and Congratulations for what you guys are doing!

Q: I am studying BSc. Astrophysics. How should I mend my path to work for LIGO in the future?

Question :As an astrophysics enthusiast and rising senior aspiring to attend HYPSMC, what should I plan to study at university to be prepared for a career in gravitational waves? As such a recent field, are there even many classes available at universities yet? 

Question :Hi guys! I was wondering what the implications for technology would be, now that we have the solid evidence for gravitational waves? Can the scientific knowledge be (theoretically) used in the future for "anti gravity" engines? Also, well done...this is massive.

Answer :One application: gravity and gravitational waves can pass through matter unobstructed. A "gravitational wave telescope" could see right through physical objects that are blocking our view, and would not require any sort of external presence like visible light.

More importantly though, this has no feasible application to anti-gravity engines. Gravitational waves aren't "gravity" like we think of it; they are a *biproduct* of gravity. Gravitational waves are distortions of space, caused by gravity stretching out the fabric of spacetime. They basically alter the distances between points in space, no real consequences with regards to gravitational attraction.

Question :What causes gravitational waves and why should we care? 

Question :Is there a single realtime application of these waves to modern technology?

Answer :One application: gravity and gravitational waves can pass through matter unobstructed. A "gravitational wave telescope" could see right through physical objects that are blocking our view, and would not require any sort of external presence like visible light.

Question :/u/blackjack_bot deal me in 

Answer :Dealer: ?

     __  __ 
    |  ||  |
    |  ||9H|
    |__||__|

Player: 17

     __  __ 
    |  ||  |
    |TS||7C|
    |__||__|

HIT or STAY

^^Made ^^by ^^/u/Davism72. ^^Send ^^feedback!
^^Source: ^^https://github.com/mattdavis1121/reddit-blackjack-bot

Question :Great job so far guys! Three waves in just over a year seems huge.

Are you now looking for bigger, smaller, further away, closer? Or are we still in the take anything we can catch phase? In other words, are we still just gathering data, or are you refining your search? Followup: If so, how do you refine this? 

Answer :Thank-you we are very excited by the detections.

The first two detections were made in the first observing run of advanced LIGO, this latest detection was made during the second observing run. Between the two observing runs the sensitivity of the detectors was improved meaning we can detect weaker signals. Signals may be weaker if they are emitted from source that are further away or if they are emitted by lower mass objects. The range of the Livingston detector in particular was improved between the first and seconds runs, this was achieved mainly be reducing the amount of light scattering in the detector. 

After the end of the current observing run further upgrades will be implemented to further increase the sensitivity of both detectors so we should see many more black hole collisions such as the three we have seen already. We expect to see a greater rate as we improve the sensitivity as weaker signals can be better extracted from the background noise, and we can search a greater volume of space. So we are searching further away. The sensitivity of the detector will be incrementally improved between each observing run until it reaches the design sensitivity.

The answer the other part of your question, yes, it is possible to operate the LIGO detectors in a configuration that is optimised to be sensitive to waves of a certain frequency. But the plan for now is to continue to run in a configuration were we are sensitive to as broad a spectrum of gravitational waves as possible (yes we will want to detect as many events as we can). 

There is a mirror called the 'signal recycling mirror' at the output of the detector that can be tuned to alter the frequency response of the detector (its sensitivity to different signal frequencies). By fixing this mirror the sensitivity to a certain frequency of signal can be greatly improved.

I hope that answers your question.

[LLO Science Fellow / University of Glasgow PhD Student]

Question :Thanks for taking the time to share your research with us! This is really fascinating and I have a bunch of questions.

I watched the videos and animations you included in your post and they helped me conceptualize what gravitational waves are and how they're being created.

In the simulation it looks like they appeared to be stable until just before the simulation. If I'm reading it right, that whole process took less than 1 second. If I understood it correctly, that seems incredibly fast.

Are black hole pairs common? Where is the nearest one that we know of? Can they be stable?

Can you tell if a pair is about to collapse? How far in advance can you predict it will happen, if you can tell at all?

The article says "These are collisions that produce more power than is radiated as light by all the stars and galaxies in the universe at any given time." It seems like that is an incredible amount of energy. If a pair like this were to collapse, say within the Milky Way, would we feel it? Would it harm us?

It looks like the mass of the new black hole is less than the sum of the 2 smaller ones. Was matter ejected during the collision?

Also, what does it mean for a black hole to be 'tilted'? Aren't they spheres?

Answer :Hi /u/PapaNachos,

I'll try to answer these, please forgive me if I miss a couple!

Up until the final stage of the merger, the black holes may appear to be rotating stably, but they are in fact slowly approaching each other. When the black holes are further apart, they emit less gravitational waves than when they are closer. Since it is the loss of energy (and angular momentum) from emitting these waves that brings the black holes closer, their approach speeds up over time. When they get too close, they fall towards each other more suddenly, a process called "plunge" and "merger".

The events LIGO has seen do happen fast! For the event just announced, the last few orbits took less than a tenth of a second to complete. The holes are traveling enormously fast by the end, a fair fraction of the speed of light.

We didn't really know before detecting them how "common" binaries made of black holes are, because we'd only theorized about their existence. Now we know they exist, and one of LIGO's goals is to better pin down how many are out there. Unfortunately, if there is no other glowing material around them, we can't see any light from a pair of black holes. This means we don't know when a pair is about to coalesce until we see the event in our detectors.

The coalescence does emit a LOT of energy. But this energy comes out in gravitational waves, which are pretty ghostly. If the black holes merged in our galaxy, they would be something like a million times closer and their waves a million times stronger. But that means they would stretch you out by only about the width of an atom. You wouldn't even notice! But for LIGO this would be an incredibly strong source. (Math for the numerically inclined: Stretch = (strain seen by LIGO)(million times enhancement)(your height) = 5x10-22(1,000,000)(2 meters) = 1 femtometer).

There is mass lost during the event not because matter is thrown out, but because mass is converted into the energy of the gravitational waves.

Question :It's an astonishing accomplishment that LIGO has detected these a third time, but why has it only been three at this point?

Is this a matter of only a few black hole mergers taking place in the regions of space LIGO can detect? Are the detectors still not sensitive enough so we're only spotting certain mergers? I know the detectors have not been on continuously since summer 2015, so have they just not been turned on enough? Have the data not been sufficiently analyzed? I can think of various reasons, but I'm curious to hear why from you.

I'm so excited by the possibilities this and future gravitational wave research opens up (yay more detectors!) and I'm glad the LIGO team is doing another AMA to further connect with the public.

Answer :Great questions, and good intuition! The answer is a combination of all the things that you described. You touched on three important points: (1) WHERE the events happen, (2) HOW sensitive LIGO is, and (3) WHEN LIGO is observing. I'll try to elaborate on all three:

(1) You're absolutely correct that we can only detect events within a certain distance of us (for events like GW170104 and GW150914, that distance is a few billion light years). So yes, only a few black hole mergers (involving "large" black holes of 10-30 solar masses) are taking place in the regions of space LIGO can detect. We can detect more massive mergers farther away, but there is still an "upper limit" to how far away these events can be. This is precisely why we quote our event rates in terms of events per volume per unit time! With three detections, we're getting close to being able to pin down this rate for events like the ones we've already seen. A few more and we should have a much better idea of just how often these things happen in the local universe.

(2) LIGO's inherent sensitivity plays a direct role in setting that distance limit I described in (1). The initial LIGO detector (which operated during the 2000's and was designed as a proof of concept) had a baseline sensitivity that was too weak to detect gravitational waves from sources. (Said another way, there were no events close enough to be detected at that sensitivity). But we dramatically improved the detector's sensitivity leading up to "advanced" LIGO (which we turned on in 2015, and was responsible for the first detection). We have been steadily improving sensitivity since since, and will continue to do so until we reach "design sensitivity" (the peak sensitivity LIGO was designed to achieve) sometime in the next few years. By that point, we hope to have pushed our distance limits 2-3 times further out than they are now. And remember, since our rates depend on the volume of space (which depends on the cube of the distance), a distance increase of 2-3 will result in a factor of more than 10 in volume. Which means we hope to see a factor of 10 (or higher) more events once LIGO is finally operating at peak sensitivity! (Hopefully including other types of events as well!)

(3) Related to all of this is how often LIGO is online in "observing" mode. Since we really just started with "advanced" LIGO in 2015, we're taking it slow and ramping up gradually. The first "observing run" was only three or four months long (from September 2015 through January 2016). We then took LIGO offline for several months to install upgrades, eventually turning it back on near the end of last year. We've been in our second observing run for a few months now, and will continue through the end of the summer, at which point we'll go offline for some more upgrades. The idea being that each consecutive observing run will be online for longer, with less downtime for upgrades. So while LIGO has been active since 2015, there have been long swathes of downtime where we haven't been actively observing! That is a big part of why we haven't seen more events. (Roughly speaking, had LIGO been observing constantly since September 2015, it's likely we would've seen several more events like these ones!)

I'm stoked to see so much excitement surrounding gravitational wave science! For those of us who have been in the community since before the first detection, it's incredibly rewarding to have our work receive such a warm reception from colleagues and enthusiasts alike. It's not hyperbole to say this is a new frontier of observational astronomy, and we can't for all the great science that will come from it in the years to come!

~RC, post-doc, gravitational wave and gamma-ray astronomer at Texas Tech University

Question :Someone explained the significance of your discovery as "Now we can listen to space, not just observe it." - It really opened my eyes to how important your work is. 

**What similar, simplified allegory could I use to explain gravitational waves to my friends and family?** 

Also just wanted to send a big congratulations from myself and my wife, Holly Renee (Shenova Fashion). We've been huge fans since your first discovery. :)

Answer :Hi /u/Dustdown [and Holly],

A common analogy we like to use is imagining that space and time is a rubber sheet. If you put a ball (ie an object that has mass) on that rubber sheet it will curve. That is the cause of the gravitational field objects have. In the case of gravitational waves, we can think of them as ripples on this rubber sheet, which are added on top of this curvature. This can also be thought of as the waves 'stretching and squeezing' spacetime as they travel through it.

These ripples are released by objects accelerating, the larger the object, the larger the waves. Since gravity is a very weak force of nature, these waves will only be seen by us if they come from very massive, dramatic events. And since our local universe is very calm (no black holes etc. in the solar system), the signals we see are from far away events.

Our detectors can be thought of as two really long rulers at right angles. When waves pass through the detector they will stretch one ruler and squeeze the other one. We constantly compare these two rulers and that gives us a measure of size and frequency of the waves.

We're really glad you're interested, if you ever get to either Hanford, Washington state or Livingston, Louisiana, look out for tours of the detector sites, they have lots of public open days and tours!

[PhD student, experimental interferometry]

Question :What is the most difficult part, of explaining your theories, to the general-public?

Big fan!

Question :Hello! Oooh my gosh I am so excited to see these responses to much superior questions, but I have one question myself. Can you give me an ELI5 for how LIGO works? I myself understand it, but I have trouble explaining it to people who do not understand how interference works.

Answer :Gravitational waves shrink space in one direction, and stretch space in the perpendicular direction.

LIGO basically set up a light beam in a L shape (using mirrors), with two equal arm lengths. If space doesn't change at all, then light should take the same amount of time to cross each arm of the L shape. However, when gravitational waves pass through, it stretches one arm and shrinks the other, causing different travel times for the two light beam, resulting in photon interference.

Question :*  How often are these expected to be detected from earth? 
*  Will there be more and more of them on a large timescale, or less?
*  Is there a limit to where in the unicerse they can ve detected from earth? (Does the wave diminish over time/space?)
*  What does the information tell us or what can we learn from them? 
*  How do you expect that to change over time as we get better and better equipment and at understanding the data?

*  How flippin awesome is the feeling of having a new confirmed wave?

Question :Thank you for taking the time to do an AMA! 

Since gravitational waves propagate at the speed of light, would radiation and gravitational waves from two black holes merging reach us at the exact same time? Once the third facility is up and running and you guys can determine the precise direction the waves came from, would an amateur with a telescope be able to see any unusual flashes of light in the sky from that direction? 

The work you guys are doing is very exciting, keep it up!  

Answer :We strongly believe that gravitational waves travel at the speed of light, and none of the gravitational wave events we've observed so far suggest that it doesn't. That's not a firm guarantee that they do travel at the speed of light, of course, it just means we have no new reason to doubt that they do. 

As a result we'd expect light produced by an event which also produced gravitational waves to arrive at the Earth at the same time as the gravitational waves (assuming they were produced at exactly the same time). This said, we don't really expect there to be any physical mechanism which can produce electromagnetic radiation from two black holes merging. On the other hand, merging objects like neutron stars might produce electromagnetic radiation, but we'd expect it to be at high frequencies (gamma rays or x-rays) which we wouldn't be able to observe on the Earth, but which might be observable by a space-based observatory. 

DW : Science Fellow at LIGO Livingston Observatory & PhD Student at Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow

Question :When do you think IndiGO (LIGO-India) will be operational?

Question :First of all, thank you for all your work and especially your transparency. I've always found LIGO fascinating. That press release was awesome.


If was talking to a friend recently about the LHC and he asked why those kinds of experiments are important. Best reply I could come up with was that if we can detect things on these kinds of scale(sub-atomic, or macro) then we can learn to understand it, which leads to being able to manipulate it or exploit it. Which leads to technology advances. Would you this is a fairly accurate explanation?

And my 2nd question. I'm having trouble wrapping my mind around the time scale. If its 3 billion light years away, how long ago did it happen? 


Question :I recently read a sci-fi book that had alien civilizations utilize gravitational waves for communication purposes. Are there any feasible improvements we can make to our detection systems that would be a step in that direction?

Question :Since GPS needs to take into account relativity for calculating a position, how Far off have we been thrown by this event?

edit:  To clarify, if GPS takes into account time relativity because of the difference in time passing between earth surface and an orbiting satelite, there must be a known or calculable scale of the impact of this kind of event.  Gravity being space/time bending 

Answer :Gravitational waves are completely insignificant on GPS or any practical scale. The gravitational wave they detected caused disturbances smaller than 1/1000 the width of a single proton.

Question :Hi! Thanks for doing this. What's the accuracy of LIGO when it comes to determining the size of black holes? Outside of black hole collisions, is there any other reasonable explanation offered for these gravitational waves? 

Question :Is there any chance that these gravitational waves could be used to detect objects instead of events, say within this century? Right now we can detect mergers of massive objects, but I'm thinking about a detection of an object such as a supermassive black hole (maybe through the absorption of stellar objects?).  

Answer :If I understand correctly, I think gravitational waves require some sort of oscillation to be produced in a way that we can currently measure. So detecting a single object is not yet feasible (of course, things can change!)

Somebody please correct me if I'm wrong though.

Edit: gravitational waves are produced by *accelerating* masses, not necessary oscillations. Oscillations are just the most significant types of accelerations we can observe (constant circular acceleration while also acceleration inwards toward the center).

Question :Thanks for doing the AMA.

My question is about what the next step is. I see people talking about how the confirmation and detection of gravitational waves is opening up a new way to see things aside from just photons. What specifically can we observe and measure with gravitational waves that we couldn't before?

Question :Question: How did you determine the mass and distance of the black holes?

Background: I listened to Dr. Neil Degrasse Tyson's Startalk episode regarding LIGO. The scientists there described how certain phenomena were predicted and what their signals would look like. I feel I have a fair approximation of how you might recognize the pattern for black holes. However, in visual astronomy we use light wavelengths to determine distance, composition, and the like. So, perhaps some corollary questions might be, what type of information does LIGO provide from which scientists can calculate things like mass, distance, composition, and the like. Do we have enough understanding of gravity to properly calculate the features and rammifications of changes to it?

Question :I have to say I Iove the work you are doing. Ever since hearing one of my professors talk about working with LIGO, I have been inspired. If I wanted to help out or assist in research, what would be the best way to go about this? Thank you and hope you have a wonderful day. 

Question :Hey Guys!
Thanks for doing this AMA

I'm not really into this but I think most of us ever heard/knew about this from Einstein's General Theory of Relativity.

My question is, does this prove the space-time universe theory he stated? And please elaborate with how this discovery could make us understand better with our universe.

Another thing, when you asked us imagine it as dropping stone in water, do gravitational waves actually shake us? (In other words, can we actually feel it?) If so, is it possible for gravitational waves destroy us?

Thank you, you guys are awesome:)

Question :How does the study of gravitational waves inform the study of dark matter and dark energy?

Answer :Not at all, I believe, other than providing further evidence in empirical support of General Relativity. They are currently two unrelated phenomena.

Question :Will any of us be alive when this discovery is used to propel people into the vastness of space?

Question :What determines the amount of energy released from colliding black holes? Is there a reason why only 2 suns worth of energy was released in the detection of these waves?

Question :What would it take to be able to harness and control or create gravitational waves on our own? 

What potential breakthroughs would this yield? 

Answer :You're creating gravitational wave all the time, just by moving. They're just Reeeeeally small.

Question :Some say LIGO's principal researchers are a 'shoo-in' for a Nobel Prize. Do you think it will happen, and when?  ( would they have been eligible for last year's award?)

Question :Hello there. What do you think will be the impact of this recent detection? What will it contribute?

Question :HEY I was an electrician for a year, subcontracted at the Livingston facility. Y'all are awesome 

Question :Hi! I hope you're all doing well!
My question for you guys is:
What the process for detecting these waves, what did you guys do in order to detect these waves and how? 

Question :What exactly are black holes and their merger? When I look up the Cassimir effect, I read that it is only observable with distances around 10nm. My (very limited) understanding is that for the Hawking radiation to occur, the event horizon needs to be well defined in space - when we are just within the event horizon, we lose the particle, whereas if we are just mere 10 further from the centre of the black hole, we are definitely beyond the event horizon and the particle can escape. How can we have an event horizon so well defined for supermassive black holes the size of our Solar system? Are black hole event horizons wobbly? (I guess that's not the best scientific term for that.) Do event horizons remain so well defined also when two black holes are spinning towards a merger? If a black hole is spinning, does the horizon get compressed round the equator? When two black holes are spinning towards a merger, what happens between their event horizons just touching and their inner structures fully merging? Do the gravitational waves tell you anything about those inner structures, their size in relation to their event horizons? (Can we judge the size of black holes' inner structures, considering that the space around them is not nicely 3-dimensional?) When are the gravitational waves the strongest - just before or after the event horizons are first touching? Are there any differences between the event horizon of a static black hole and the event horizon at the point where two black holes are just touching?

Question :Can you walk us through the process of determining the distance of the black hole merger events? In other words, what formula are you applying to the data you collect to determine distance?

Question :What physical application do you think can be provided from the understanding of gravitational waves? it's obvious that it directly effects the travel of light in the universe, but is there any other unique   effects from these waves? What do you think human civilization could benefit from this new understanding of gravitation? 

Question :How massive must an event be for our current detector to capture, and how long do you personally think it will take until it is possible to detect smaller events or objects (such as two planets colliding) depending on how precise the equipment is?

Question :I watched the simulation video in OP and I'm curious as to why the signal goes flat after the merger of the two black holes? Also, did you figure out the signals were of two stars orbiting each other because of the amplitude/frequency of the signals? one being bigger the other smaller. Thanks!

Answer :The two objects create gravitational waves when they orbit around a fixed point. One object would not create any waves because there is no distrubance of its gravitational field.

Question :I still have trouble with this since we haven't yet detected gravitons. 

Question :This is more of a rhetorical question but do you ever stop and think about just how many coincidences has to happen throughout billions of years for us to be right here, right now at this point in time. With the exact technology needed to detect these gravitational waves that were unleashed so long ago, and only just now hit us when we had the capabilities to detect them?

Answer :That doesn't make sense. Hypothetically there are black hole mergers happening throughout out the universe all the time. So any time somebody turns on a sensitive enough detector they're going to see them. No different than creating large optical telescopes and seeing distant supernovar. 

Question :If I understood the article today, you are finding more and more black holes. You will detect more in the future, and a huge amount have already occurred. So have you just discovered dark matter?

Question :What would I have to study if I was interested in working around this field? This would be really interesting!

Question :Recently experiments at the LHC was disrupted by a ferret. So my question is, what would the worst type of animal to get into the LIGO beam lines? 

Question :Can you out reddit AMAs in the "pathways to impact" part of research grant proposals? 🤔

Question :Hello. This question is for Dr. Gabbard. Do you believe in life after love?

Question :If you people get caught in one spectacular lie, do you always just wait a year and a half and come back with another one? I guess You are relying on the short memory of most people, but when I heard this announcement of gravity waves last time, I said to myself, “Didn’t they already do this? Didn’t we get a huge announcement of gravity waves in early 2014? Didn’t Alan Guth win a million-dollar prize for that?” In fact, he did. He—along with Alexei Starobinsky and Andre Linde—won the Kavli Prize in July 2014, so 3 million was allegedly paid out. Physics today is nothing but a huge pile of ever-growing shit.

Answer :Guth does inflation, not gravitational waves.

Question :Hi! I had a wonderful time visiting your site at MIT. In a very simplified way, do gravitational waves prove the law of conservation of energy and that is why its so significant?

Question :I want to see the spectrogram , graphs 

Question :When are you going to reveal evidence of an upcoming geomagnetic reversal that may very well render all GPS useless?

Answer :I do not believe GPS rely on the magnetic north at all.

Question :gravity is the weakest force in the universe, no way gravity alone can be responsible for stars and orbit, i think electricity plays a much bigger role than mainstream science wants to admit, also black holes is bs

Answer :It's strong enough to hold this planet together and everything on it. Seems strong enough to me. 

Question :can we detect if trump and putin are a binary star merging together?

